The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland was established by the Acts of Union in 1801 that united the Kingdom of Great Britain and the Kingdom of Ireland into one unitary and sovereign state. It continued in this form until 1927, when it evolved into the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, after the Irish Free State gained a degree of independence in 1922.
Rapid industrialisation that began in the decades prior to the state's formation continued up until the mid-19th century. The Great Irish Famine, exacerbated by government inaction in the mid-19th century, led to demographic collapse in much of Ireland and increased calls for Irish land reform. The 19th century was an era of Industrial Revolution, and growth of trade and finance, in which Britain largely dominated the world economy. Outward migration was heavy to the principal British overseas possessions and to the United States.
The UK, from its islands off the coast of Europe, financed the coalition that defeated France during the Napoleonic Wars, and developed its dominant Royal Navy enabling the British Empire to become the foremost world power for the next century. From the defeat of Napoleon to World War I, Britain was almost continuously at peace with the Great Powers. However, the UK did engage in extensive wars in Africa and Asia, such as the Opium Wars, to extend its empire and influence. The Colonial Office and India Office ruled through a small number of administrators who managed the units of the empire locally, while local institutions developed. British India was by far the most important overseas possession. In overseas policy, the central policy was free trade, which enabled British financiers and merchants to operate successfully in otherwise independent countries, as in South America. Beginning in earnest in the second half of the 19th century, the Imperial government granted increasing autonomy to local governments in colonies where white settlers were politically dominant, with this process resulting in Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Newfoundland and South Africa becoming self-governing dominions. While these remained part of the Empire, they were permitted greater management of their internal affairs, with Britain remaining responsible for their foreign and trade policies.
With respect to other powers, the British remained non-aligned until the 20th century when the growing naval power of the German Empire came to be seen as an existential threat to the British Empire. In response, London began to cooperate with Japan, France and Russia, and moved closer to the United States. Although not formally allied with any of these powers, by 1914 British policy had all but committed to declaring war on Germany if the latter attacked France. This was realized in 1914 when Germany invaded France via Belgium, whose neutrality had been guaranteed by London. The ensuing First World War pitted the Allied and Associated Powers including the British Empire, France, Russia, Italy and the U.S. against the Central Powers of Germany, Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire. The war ended in an Allied victory in 1918 but inflicted a massive cost to British manpower, materiel and treasure.
Growing desire for Irish self-governance led to the Irish War of Independence, which resulted in British recognition of the Irish Free State in 1922. Although the Free State was explicitly governed under dominion status and thus was not a fully independent polity, as a dominion it was no longer part of the United Kingdom and ceased to be represented in the Westminster Parliament. Six northeastern counties in Ireland, which since 1920 were being governed under a more limited form of home rule, opted-out of joining the Free State and remained part of the Union. In light of these changes, the British state was renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on 12 April 1927 with the Royal and Parliamentary Titles Act 1927. The modern-day United Kingdom is the same state, a direct continuation of what remained after the Irish Free State's secession, as opposed to being an entirely new successor state.