
Broadway: That’s Entertainment!

Times Square, 42nd Street, Broadway—just the mention of these
magical names elicits images of glittering marquees, glamorous
opening nights, show-stopping musical numbers. The entertainment capital of the world, New York’s Broadway theater district
is hallowed ground for movie lovers. First of all, it was on Broadway stages that the careers of some of our greatest film stars—
Mary Pickford, Bette Davis, Joan Crawford, Rudolph Valentino,
Humphrey Bogart, Barbra Streisand, Robert Redford—were
launched. It was also on and off Broadway that the glorious age
of the movie palace flourished in New York during the 1920s,
1930s, and 1940s. But while movie lovers can still attend many
of Broadway’s legitimate theaters and futuristic new multiplexes,
most of its historic “cathedrals of the motion picture”—such as
the Roxy, the Paramount, Loew’s State, the Strand, the Rivoli,
and the Capitol—are gone.
Be that as it may, the last decade has seen the rise of a spectacular new Times Square—boasting some of the world’s most
amazing electronic and fiber-optic signs and enormous digital
outdoor movie screens. In addition, an important component of
this revitalized entertainment district has been the restoration
of many of its formerly derelict theaters. This is especially true


62

Z
%
%

BI

Central Park

ZA

60.
59

Columbus Circle

58
Die

—<- 10 (39)

56

|

eat

55
54.

;

53

Se

eee

eect

eB2

bee
|

34
32
31

54

30 29

50

27

49

48

«28

23

AT:
AG

a5 2
tt

18 19

a

1610.11.13
18

7

912
43

5

42

Ss

25
26
24 on
4g 2!

6

Times 8
Square —

Port Authority

3

40
39
38
37
36

Avenue
Tenth

Ninth
Avenue

Aventie
Eighth

Seventh
Aventie

35
34
© 2004 Jeffrey L. Ward


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

OM,

Times Square trilogy (left
to right): Times Building,

Paramount

Building, and

Astor Hotel, ca. 1930

of 42nd Street between Broadway and Eighth Avenue, which a
mere fifteen years ago was a no-man’s-land of drug pushers,
porno movie houses, and sex shops. Now the marquees of the
New Amsterdam, the New Victory, Ford Center for the Perform-

ing Arts (formerly the New Apollo and Lyric theaters), and Empire burn bright. To be sure, some purists feel the area—with its
Disney Store and new Madame Tussauds Wax Museum—has become too squeaky-clean touristy and has lost its integrity. That’s
debatable—but one thing Times Square definitely hasn’t lost is its
star quality.
Besides historic theaters and futuristic billboards, movie
lovers will also find that this part of town encompasses an often
overlooked world of soundstages, recording studios, and production offices centered in the 40s and 50s west of Eighth
Avenue. Here, filmmaking has gone on since the days of silent
pictures, and while many of the historic studios in this part of
town are no longer affiliated with Twentieth Century-Fox,
Warner Bros., or Paramount, as they once were, they are still
turning out features, television series, and commercials. This is
where Hollywood on the Hudson gets down to business.


98

NE Wiy OR KeeRHE

1. PORT

AUTHORITY

West

40th

Ninth

Avenues

to 42nd

BUS

MOV

TES ROVE

Res 36)! DE

TERMINAL

Streets

between

Eighth

and

Said to be the largest and busiest bus terminal in the world, this
massive multilevel space—all escalators, garish neon lighting,
and dubious denizens—Port Authority, as it is known to New
Yorkers and New Jerseyites, was built in 1950 and remodeled
and enlarged several times since. The least glamorous way to enter the Big Apple both in reality and on-screen, Port Authority
has provided a decidedly gritty New York City welcome for excon Sean Connery in Sidney Lumet’s The Anderson Tapes (1971)
and for the mysterious title character, played by Rosanna Arquette, in Susan Seidelman’s Desperately Seeking Susan (1985).
The bus terminal has also appeared in Angie (1994), One True
Thing (1998), and Igby Goes Down (2002). To see what the
place looked like when it was new, The Marrying Kind, a 1952
Judy Holliday comedy directed by George Cukor, shows Holliday and her daughter leaving from Port Authority to see her husband, Aldo Ray, who is in a sanitarium near Brewster. On the

trip the bus breaks down, which means that when they arrive
they have just enough time to say hello, then board the last bus
back to New York.
An integral part of the Port Authority experience is a trip
through the Lincoln Tunnel, which feeds directly into the bus station. Another decidedly unglamorous New York landmark, the
tunnel—almost 100 feet below the Hudson River—links New
York and New Jersey. Originally built in 1937, it now consists of
three separate tubes, each over a mile long. The tunnel appears
in most of the aforementioned films—and it has recently been
immortalized in the opening credits of the hit HBO series The
Sopranos. The tunnel was also featured in the 2003 feature Elf,
in a scene where Santa’s helper Will Ferrell travels the tube on
foot via its pedestrian walkway in his quest to find his birth
father.


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

=

99

Adaptive reuse: 1912
Empire theater as a

twenty-five-screen
multiplex

2. AMC
234

EMPIRE
West

25

42nd

Street

The 42nd Street Development Corporation achieved a minor
miracle in 1998, when it moved the 1912 facade of the historic
Empire Theater 170 feet west on 42nd Street to form the new entrance for the city’s largest multiplex—the twenty-five-screen
AMC Empire. When the theater first opened it was a legit house
called the Eltinge in honor of its frequent headliner Julian Eltinge, who was the town’s top female impersonator at the time.
In the 1930s, the Eltinge started showing films and eventually
was renamed the Empire Theater. Historian Louis Botto reports
that the Empire was famous for having three different sizes of
seats—small, regular, and extra-large. And for film buffs who remember the Empire Theater from the famous 1948 film A Double Life, where Ronald Colman plays an actor/producer who
gets a bit carried away in the role of Othello, that the Empire
Theater stood at Broadway and 40th Street and was torn down

in 1953.
Meanwhile, serious film buffs will be interested in yet another

historic theater, the Liberty, which currently stands awaiting renovation hidden behind a fast-food court just up the block from
the AMC Empire. The Liberty also began its life as a legit house,
and managed to survive into the 1980s showing action and
porno films. Its importance in film history, however, has to do


100

NEWS

YORK:

FHE

MOVIESEOVERSS

{GODE

with an event back in March 1915, when the theater hosted the
official East Coast opening of a movie that represented a milestone in the art of filmmaking. So much money, effort, and time
had gone into this epic production that a full-fledged Broadway
theater was leased for its premiere and its promoters charged the
then unheard-of price of $2 for a reserved ticket. The film was
D. W. Griffith’s The Birth of a Nation, and it ran for eleven
months at the Liberty. Highly controversial owing to its decidedly racist look at the post—Civil War South, the film was protested by the NAACP as well as by a number of other groups that
tried to block its exhibition. The fact that Griffith’s film aroused
so much feeling was ultimately one of the reasons for its landmark status in film-history books, for The Birth of a Nation
proved just how powerful the medium of film could be if used to
its full potential.
The Birth of a Nation also proved that movies could make
really big money—especially at $2 a head. One of those who
profited greatly from The Birth of a Nation was a former junk
dealer from Massachusetts named Louis B. Mayer. Having gone
from junk to running movie theaters, Mayer managed to tie up
the New England distribution rights to Griffith’s landmark film
and made a fortune on the deal and became one of the industry’s
most important players—especially a decade later when he ran
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer studios in Hollywood.
3. NEW
214

AMSTERDAM
West

42nd

THEATER

Street

Originally built for vaudeville producers Marc Klaw and A. L.
Erlanger in 1903, the beautiful Art Nouveau New Amsterdam
was taken over in 1913 by the great Florenz Ziegfeld as a site for
his famous Follies. Practically every one of the next fourteen
years, Ziegfeld came out with a new edition of his spectacular
stage show at the New Amsterdam, and he would unleash on the
world talents like Fanny Brice, Eddie Cantor, Will Rogers, W. C.
Fields, Fred Astaire, Jack Benny, Bob Hope, Paulette Goddard,
Mae Murray, Marion Davies, and Ziegfeld Follies queen Marilyn Miller.
While Ziegfeld’s Follies flourished downstairs at the New Am-


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

101

sterdam, its rooftop nightclub—the New Amsterdam Roof—
pulled in la créme de la créme of New York society, who came to
see Ziegfeld stars in a glamorous cabaret setting. Later, when
Prohibition killed the New Amsterdam Roof, the place led a varied life as a conventional theater, radio studio, rehearsal hall,

and TV studio. Radio buffs may remember it as home of the
WOR Mutual Theater in the late 1930s-early 1940s, when it
was broadcasting the chilling series The Shadow, which once
starred Orson Welles.
Ziegfeld departed from the New Amsterdam’s main theater
in 1927. It spent the next ten years as a Broadway house, was
converted into a movie palace in 1937, and continued to show
films until 1983. After that, the crumbling theater stood vacant
for over ten years until the Walt Disney Company, by that time
a major Broadway player with the success of its Beauty and the
Beast musical adapted from its 1991 animated feature, signed
a lease in 1995 to restore the New Amsterdam and operate it
as a Broadway house. After two years of painstaking restoration by Disney’s innovative Imagineering division, the theater
reopened and soon was home to another Disney animated hit—
turned-Broadway smash: The Lion King, one of the most successful musicals of all time.

The Disney touch:
restored interior of New

Amsterdam

Theater


102

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Before Disney entered the picture, the abandoned New Amsterdam was used in several films, notably the 1988 Sam Elliott-Peter Weller urban action thriller Shakedown, and Louis
Malle’s avant-garde Vanya on 42nd Street (1993), as the theater
where Wallace Shawn, Julianne Moore, and company rehearse
and perform a modern-dress version of Chekhov’s Uncle Vanya.
To see the New Amsterdam—and Times Square—in its heyday,
movie lovers should also check out the 1929 made-in—New York
talkie, Glorifying the American Girl, which has a location sequence that documents an opening night at the theater with
wonderful shots of Florenz Ziegfeld, Billie Burke, financier Otto
Kahn, and Mayor Jimmy Walker. The theater’s most famous film
appearance, however, was fashioned at Hollywood’s MGM
dream factory—that is, the 1941 musical extravaganza Ziegfeld
Girl, where showgirls Judy Garland, Hedy Lamarr, and Lana
Turner stumble into fame, fortune, and misfortune respectively.
Disney offers guided tours of the New Amsterdam; for information,
visit www.newyorkled.com/timessquare.htm.

4. KNICKERBOCKER
152

West

42nd

BUILDING

Street

Erected in 1902 and restored in 2003, this Times Square office
building still stuns with its wrought-iron balconies, sculpted cornices, and elegant mansard roofs. Originally built as Col. John
Jacob Astor’s famed Knickerbocker Hotel, for twenty years this
was one of Broadway’s most fashionable places to stay and to
play. Offering great luxury, the Knickerbocker had a glorious
dining room with a marble floor and a ceiling modeled after one
in Napoleon’s palace at Fontainebleau in France. For its mirrored café, the artist Frederic Remington provided an Indian battle scene, and for the hotel’s oak-paneled barroom Astor
commissioned Maxfield Parrish’s Old King Cole and His Fiddlers Three, which today hangs in the King Cole Bar of another
of Astor’s hotels, the St. Regis at Fifth Avenue and S5Sth Street.
The services at the Knickerbocker more than matched its lavish decor. For businesspeople who arrived without baggage, the
hotel provided pajamas, combs, and brushes at no extra charge.


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

103

Knickerbocker Hotel

building, 1987

And if a guest had an unexpected formal function to attend, the
Knickerbocker had a full array of tuxedos and accessories in a
wide range of sizes. Again, there was no charge.
One of the hotel’s most famous erstwhile residents was the
great showman George M. Cohan. Known more as a vaudevillian, playwright, and songwriter, Cohan constantly appeared in

films from the late 1910s through the early 1930s and also saw
a number of his plays become films in which he did not appear,
such as Little Nellie Kelly (1940), which starred Judy Garland.
He will be best remembered by movie lovers through James
Cagney’s portrayal of him in Warner’s 1942 musical Yankee
Doodle Dandy.
Another of the Knickerbocker’s former residents was the famous opera singer Enrico Caruso; he not only held forth on the
stage of the old Metropolitan Opera a few blocks away at Broadway and 38th Street, but also appeared in two films for Adolph
Zukor’s Famous Players Film Company in 1918. Despite his


NEW

104

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

great fame, an opera singer in a silent picture didn’t make it
with the public, and after Caruso’s first Famous Players film,
My Cousin, flopped at the box office, his second was never released.
The Knickerbocker Hotel didn’t fare much better; in 1920 it
shut down and was converted into the office building that it remains today. Its demise was blamed on Prohibition.
5. MANHATTAN
400

West

PLAZA

43rd

Street

A unique experiment in subsidized housing, Manhattan Plaza is
the first and only luxury apartment complex where the majority
of tenants are working show-business people who, during lean
periods, are required to pay only 30 percent of their gross earnings in rent. At the same time, the building’s star residents have
to come up with the same big bucks that most Manhattanites are
forced to pay for the privilege of living in the Big Apple. Among
its former celebrity denizens have been Angela Lansbury, Jane
Alexander, Helen Hayes, and Tennessee Williams.
How did Manhattan Plaza come about? Definitely xot through
the beneficence of some stagestruck real estate developer. Originally, the building was to have been yet another high-rent highrise. However, as Manhattan Plaza was nearing completion in
1976, New York City’s real estate picture was decidedly different than it is today, and the developers were having a hard time
luring high-income tenants to their project’s dicey Hell’s Kitchen
location between Ninth and Tenth Avenues. It was then that the
subsidy plan was devised by the City of New York in order to
salvage the money that the city had invested in the building. Today, thanks largely to Manhattan Plaza, the neighborhood now
abounds with restaurants, shops, and off-Broadway theaters. In
2004, however, the building was sold, putting the unique subsidy
plan in jeopardy. Needless to say, many tenants are fighting hard
to hold on to their apartments and their low rents.


BROADWAY:

6. CLUB
252

THAT’S

NEW
West

ENTERTAINMENT!

YORK
43rd

SITE

105

y

Street

In late 1999, this Times Square disco found itself very much in
the news when two of its highest-profile patrons, rap mogul/
fashion designer/actor Sean Combs (aka Puff Daddy, P-Diddy,
Sean Puffy Combs), his then gal-pal Jennifer Lopez, and his
bodyguard were involved in a shooting in which three people
were injured. Combs, Lopez, the bodyguard, and a rapper friend
all fled the club and were later arrested. Lopez was released the
same night with no charges. And after indictments, press conferences, suits, countersuits, a courtroom trial, and alittle legal help
from O.J. Simpson lawyer Johnnie Cochran, Combs and his

bodyguard were acquitted. Club New York, by the way, closed
down in late 2003.
7. PARAMOUNT
1501

BUILDING

Broadway

This thirty-five-story Times Square pyramid—crowned by a
Deco clock tower and a gigantic glass globe—is one of the greatest monuments to early moviemaking still standing in Manhattan. Erected in 1926, 1501 Broadway made its debut as the
Paramount Building, the man behind it being Paramount Pictures’ Adolph Zukor, the mogul who founded the Famous Players Film Company back in 1912 and then went on to head one
of the world’s most powerful studios.
The dramatic mountain of a building that Zukor erected for
his company on Times Square not only housed Paramount offices but was also home to the glorious Paramount Theater. Designed by architects Rapp and Rapp, the Paramount had three
lobbies, including a great hall punctuated at one end by an extraordinary marble staircase modeled after the one at the Paris
Opera, plus a myriad of special public rooms that ranged from
a tea gallery to a ladies’ smoking lounge to a music room where
a string orchestra played chamber music for customers waiting
for seats. To keep track of the theater’s 3,900 seats, 150 ushers
had a special electronic signal system that told of vacancies in the

vast auditorium.


106

NEW

wr
Pee

YORK:

a

THE

IMOVIESEOV

ERAS {GU DE

a a

Cat, ee
ie

LTR esoy

are
aL 3 aT Se
ee

BY

RSs ARG Pans.
Meee ee

Paramount Theater, 1927

Throughout the years, the Paramount became just as famous
for the headliners that studded its live stage shows as for the
movies it presented. Of the performers associated with the Paramount, none is more legendary than Frank Sinatra, whose appearances at the theater in the early 1940s brought out the
droves of squealing teenaged girls who helped turn Sinatra into
a superstar, although much of the hysteria seems to have been a
carefully orchestrated publicity stunt in which a press agent not
only distributed free tickets to pack the Paramount, but even
coached some young audience members on how and when to
squeal during the performance.
The Paramount bit the dust in the 1950s. Hollowed out
rather than knocked down, the space that the theater took up in
the Paramount Building was then “filled in” with offices. In the
1990s, however, the World Wrestling Entertainment company
erected a replica of the theater’s famous marquee as an entrance
for the wrestling arena it had installed inside. Meanwhile, Paramount, the company that started it all, is now a part of the Viacom media conglomerate, which currently has its offices next
door in the high-rise at 1515 Broadway.


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

107

Home base for

fegsts)
8 Ly

eens ola g

EMAN SIXMON)

ji
are

e

:

2a

i

ae i

THE DA

7:

Good Morning
;

;

America: Times

Square Studios

8. TIMES

SQUARE

Broadway

and

STUDIOS
43rd

Street

In 1999, the Walt Disney Company, as part of its continuing efforts to spruce up Times Square, opened this high-tech TV studio with huge windows overlooking the bustling crossroads
below. The studios were built expressly for ABC’s Good Morning America (ABC is owned by Disney), and they enabled the

show to go out onto the street, as its biggest rival, the Today
show, had been doing since 1994. Today, in addition to providing a home for GMA, the futuristic facility is also used by 20/20
as well as by non-ABC productions.
Visit http:/site yahoo.com/timessquarestudios/

9. ST.

JAMES

THEATER

246

West

44th

Street

It was just like in the movies. It was 1954, and the show was The
Pajama Game at the St. James. The star dancer, Carol Haney,
broke her leg not long after opening night, and the chorus girl
had to fill in for her. A big movie producer—Hal Wallis—was in
the audience, and he was so taken by the twenty-year-old understudy’s performance that he offered her a movie contract. And
that’s how Shirley MacLaine went to Hollywood.
In addition to giving the world Shirley MacLaine, the St.


108

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

BOVER=S

“GUIDE

James can also boast at least one former usherette who became
a movie star: Lauren Bacall, who worked at the theater in the
early 1940s in order to make ends meet during her starvingactress days in Manhattan.
Around the same time, in 1943, the St. James hosted a musical no one expected to be a hit—Rodgers and Hammerstein’s
Oklahoma! Of special interest to movie lovers may be the fact
that the director of this landmark musical comedy (notable because it featured songs and ballet numbers integral to the story
line) was film director Rouben Mamoulian, whose classic movies
include Applause, a 1929 New York sound film (available on
video and DVD) about the world of burlesque; Dr. Jekyll and
Mr. Hyde (1932), with Fredric March; Song of Songs (1933),
starring Marlene Dietrich; Garbo’s Queen Christina (1933);
Becky Sharp (1935), the first feature film to use three-strip Technicolor; and Silk Stockings (1957), with Fred Astaire and Cyd
Charisse.
Among its other important Broadway productions, the St.
James also housed The King and I (1951), Li’l Abner (1956),
Flower Drum Song (1958), Hello, Dolly! (1964), and Mel
Brooks’s history-making The Producers (2002). Based on the hilarious 1968 nonmusical film, the show won a record number of
Tonys (twelve) and charged a record top ticket price of $100. If
that wasn’t enough, The Producers also created a new Broadway
concept, setting aside a limited number of particularly good VIP
seats at $480 a pop—in other words, legitimate tickets at scalper
prices. Talk about producers!
10.

MAJESTIC

THEATER

245

44th

West

Street

In Billy’s Wilder’s moving 1960 film The Apartment, promotionminded Jack Lemmon lets his boss use his apartment for his extracurricular amorous activities. In love with the company
secretary played by Shirley MacLaine, Lemmon stands in front
of the Majestic waiting for MacLaine, who seems to have stood
him up for a date to the town’s current hottest show, The Music
Man. While he paces back and forth, little does Lemmon know
that she is in his very own apartment with his boss. If the film


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

109

were redone at any time between 1988 and the present, the show
on the marquee at the Majestic would be The Phantom of the
Opera, which is on its way to outpacing Cats as the longestrunning musical in Broadway history.
11. BROADHURST
235

West

44th

THEATER
Street

This is the theater that really put Humphrey Bogart on the map.
Despite the fact the Bogart had acted in theater and films since
the early 1920s, his career was, at best, mediocre when he was
signed to do the part of a gangster in Robert E. Sherwood’s The
Petrified Forest, which opened at the Broadhurst on January 7,
1935. Being cast as a tough guy was something new for Bogart,
who had usually played ineffectual second leads both on stage
and on screen. The Petrified Forest was to change all that, espe-

Bogart at the

Broadhurst: The
Petrified Forest,

1935


110

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOV

TESEOWER6 iGUI DE

cially when Bogart re-created his Broadway role in the Warner
Bros. film version of the play. In typical Hollywood fashion,
however, Bogart almost missed out on the film because Warner
Bros. really wanted its resident gangster, Edward G. Robinson,
to do the part. Ultimately they wanted The Petrified Forest’s
other star, Leslie Howard, even more than Robinson, because
Howard told the studio that he wouldn’t do his role unless Bogart was cast. Bogie got the part and quickly became the toughest guy on the Warner lot.
Another Hollywood legend of the 1940s got a big career
boost via the Broadhurst stage. The show was a 1939 revue,
The Streets of Paris, that featured comics Bud Abbott and Lou
Costello, dancers Gower (Champion) and Jeanne Tyler, and a
host of other performers. The real star of the show, however, was
a Latin bombshell named Carmen Miranda, who went on to parade her fruit-laden headdresses and her fiery temperament
through a string of Twentieth Century-Fox films with Latin lo-

cales and titles such as Down Argentine Way (1940), That Night
in Rio (1941), and Weekend in Havana (1941). Appropriately,
Miss Miranda’s Portuguese father ran a wholesale fruit operation in Brazil!
The Broadhurst also saw Rosalind Russell triumph as Auntie
Mame from 1956 to 1958, before she did the same thing in the
Warner Bros. film version in 1959. It was also this theater where
Woody Allen’s Play It Again, Sam ran; the 1969 comedy starred
Allen as well as the actress who would go on to be a major leading lady in both his on- and off-screen life: Diane Keaton. It’s
also not every day that Superman meets superstar on stage, but
it happened at the Broadhurst in 1976, when Christopher Reeve
and Katharine Hepburn costarred in the comedy A Matter of
Gravity.

One of the theater’s biggest 1990s hits was another of that
growing phenomenon: the big Broadway musical based on a
small nonmusical feature film. In this case, it was Kiss of the Spider Woman. It was also in the 1990s that the Broadhurst wound
up as a location in the quirky film Being John Malkovich (1999)
when Catherine Keener has a rendezvous with Malkovich in a
dressing room. But was it really Malkovich?


BROADWAY:

12.

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

11

SARDI’S
234

West

44th

Street

What Hollywood’s old Brown Derby restaurant on Vine Street
was to the movie industry, Sardi’s on West 44th Street continues
to be for the Broadway theater in Manhattan. Once described as
“the club, mess hall, lounge, post office, saloon, and marketplace
of the people of the theater,” Sardi’s was founded in 1921 by
Vincent Sardi, an Italian immigrant who started his New York
restaurant career as a waiter. In 1921, Sardi and his wife opened
their original restaurant at 248 West 44th Street, several doors
away from its current location, to which it moved in 1927 to
make way for the St. James Theater. From the start, the warm,

family atmosphere that the Sardis brought to the theater district
appealed to show folk. What also appealed was the generosity that Vincent Sardi showed toward many performers during
their lean periods “between engagements.” Supposedly, James
Cagney, in his struggling days, frequently dined at Sardi’s on

On location at Sardi’s: Rod Steiger in No Way to Treat a Lady, 1968

a


112

NEW!

YORK:

THE

MOV

NESE OMERS

TGIUIIDIE

credit. By the same token, Sardi’s became known as a place
where the famous could go and be assured that their privacy
would be respected. In the 1940s, when she had left Hollywood,
and every journalist on earth wanted to interview her, Greta
Garbo could dine at Sardi’s in relative seclusion.
Today Sardi’s no longer provides handouts to out-of-work
actors, but it is still a place where some of New York’s most
celebrated theater and movie people gather. Usually Sardi’s is a
celebrity-spotter’s dream; but even when there are no heavyweights in the place, movie lovers will still find themselves surrounded by some of the biggest names in show business, because
their autographed caricatures hang on every available inch of
wall space. Muppets fans may remember how Kermit the Frog
sneaked a picture of himself onto Sardi’s wall and waited at a
table for fellow diners to recognize him in The Muppets Take
Manhattan (1984). Other films to feature Sardi’s sequences include Martin Scorsese’s 1983 The King of Comedy, where smalltime comic Robert De Niro dines with talk-show star Jerry Lewis,

and No Way to Treat a Lady (1968), the campy thriller with
Rod Steiger playing an actor/producer/serial killer. In the Sardi’s
scene, which features a cameo appearance by Vincent Sardi,
Steiger asks for a phone to be brought to his table and calls police headquarters to taunt the detective in charge of investigating
the serial killings. In that romantic pre-cell phone age, many
restaurants had telephone jacks at all the “important” tables.
Visit www.sardis.com.

13.

SHUBERT

THEATER

225

44th

West

Street

She had been branded “box-office poison” in 1938 by the president of the Independent Theater Owners of America because her
pictures didn’t make money. She wanted desperately to play
Scarlett O’Hara in Gone With the Wind, but David O. Selznick
wouldn’t give it to her. When asked why, the famous Hollywood
producer told Katharine Hepburn, “Because, my dear, I can’t see
Rhett Butler chasing you for twelve years.” And so, when playwright Philip Barry approached her about a play he was writing
with her in mind for the lead, Miss Hepburn, fed up with Holly-


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

113

wood, consented to do the role of headstrong heiress Tracy
Lord in The Philadelphia Story. In addition, together with her
good pal at the time, millionaire aviator/movie mogul Howard
Hughes, she put up half of the money needed to produce Barry’s
play. It was a wise move on Kate’s part. The Philadelphia Story
opened at the Shubert Theater on March 28, 1939, and was a

critical and financial smash hit. It not only bolstered Hepburn’s
sagging career, it made her a wealthy woman—especially after
she and Hughes sold the screen rights to MGM, a deal that gave
her the starring role in the picture, opposite Jimmy Stewart and
Cary Grant, as well as a lucrative long-term contract with the
studio.
Movie lovers may also be interested in knowing that it was
at the Shubert Theater that Barbara (she hadn’t yet dropped
the second a) Streisand made her Broadway debut (and stole
the show) in I Can Get It for You Wholesale in 1962. Playing the role of a secretary named Miss Marmelstein, Barbra also
stole the heart of the show’s leading man, Elliott Gould, whom
she married in 1964. While doing Wholesale, she reportedly got
bored in her small role and asked various other female members of the cast to switch parts with her for a performance or
two. Needless to say, the other actresses declined her offers. She
also chewed gum onstage, which irked the stage manager enormously. On the gum-chewing business, Streisand had this to say
in an interview: “Listen, what does gum in your mouth matter
if you’re doing your job?”
In 1974, the Shubert saw Patti and Maxene Andrews, the two
surviving members of the Andrews Sisters, the legendary singing

trio of the 1940s, headline a campy Hollywood Canteen-ish
musical called Over Here. Two of the boys in the chorus of the
show went on to film fame: John Travolta and Treat Williams.
The following year, the Shubert Theater welcomed producer
Joseph Papp’s A Chorus Line. The show kept on rolling until
April 1990, when it closed after 6,137 performances. The 1988
Richard Attenborough-directed film version of A Chorus Line
got decidedly mixed reviews and was a box-office bomb. And
while most of all those Broadway musicals inspired by films have
been big hits on Broadway, Big, which opened at the Shubert in
1996, proved the exception.


114

14.

NEW

BELASCO
111

West

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

EOVER=s {GW DE

THEATER
44th

Street

In one of Woody Allen’s funnier films in the last decade, Bullets
Over Broadway (1994) had John Cusack trying unsuccessfully
to get his play, God of Our Fathers, staged. Things changed
when he got the backing of a local mobster who, it turned out,
wanted a say in the casting. Thus Cusack got his show on at the
Belasco, but with his backer’s no-talent girlfriend (Jennifer Tilly)
in a leading role. In 2002, the Belasco was again featured on
screen, as playwright Gwyneth Paltrow paces outside the theater
while a show of hers is premiering inside in The Royal Tenenbaums.
The 1907 theater is named for the flamboyant early-twentiethcentury actor-director-producer David Belasco. Nicknamed “the
bishop of Broadway,” because of his penchant for dressing in
ecclesiastical garb, Belasco is said to haunt the place, especially
on opening nights, when his ghost has been spotted sitting alone
in a box dressed to kill.
15.

MARTIN
302

West

BECK
45th

THEATER
Street

She was riding high in 1933. She had received rave notices for
her performance in Morning Glory, and her work in the not-yetreleased Little Women was the talk of Hollywood. Indeed, at
twenty-four, Katharine Hepburn could do no wrong. And so,
instead of making another picture, the impetuous young actress
decided to do a Broadway show. A British play called The Lake
was chosen for her by the bright young director Jed Harris.
Unfortunately, it was a terrible play—and Katharine Hepburn
was dreadful in it. So dreadful that Dorothy Parker wrote of
Hepburn’s performance the famous, “she ran the gamut of emotions from A to B.” The Lake played the Martin Beck Theater
for about seven weeks, after which a somewhat humbled Miss
Hepburn escaped to Europe. Ironically, the day she set sail, she
was comforted by the news that she had just won an Academy
Award for Morning Glory.
Practically a half century later, another legendary Hollywood


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

Broadway flop: Katharine Hepburn

115

in The Lake, 1933

star tried her luck at the Martin Beck and, much to the surprise
of both audiences and critics, Elizabeth Taylor turned in a creditable performance in her Broadway debut in the role of Regina
Giddens in the 1981 revival of Lillian Hellman’s The Little Foxes.
But when Miss Taylor returned to Broadway the following year
in what the world expected to be one of the major theatrical
events of the twentieth century—Taylor starring with her exhusband Richard Burton in Noél Coward’s Private Lives—she
did not fare as well. Private Lives, which played the LuntFontanne Theatre on West 46th Street, was a critical and commercial disaster. Indeed, toward the end of the run, when many


116

NEW

YWOIR'K

THE

sMiOM LES BOW ERs SGI9i DIE

of the people in the audience were there on discount tickets, Taylor’s diamonds were more talked about than her performance.
Liz never returned to Broadway.
In 1995, Carol Burnett, who over the years had starred in various Broadway productions, returned to Broadway in a dreadful
farce called Moon Over Buffalo at the Martin Beck, which even
Miss Burnett’s prodigious comic talents could not salvage. Far
better than the show was the 1997 documentary Moon Over
Broadway, made by D. A. Pennebaker and Chris Hedges, which
eavesdropped on the rehearsals, out-of-town tryouts, and considerable backstage dramas involved with bringing this turkey to
the Great White Way. The Martin Beck recently changed its
name to the Al Hirschfeld Theater, in honor of the famous
Broadway caricaturist.
16.

JOHN
252

GOLDEN
West

45th

THEATER
Street

Does anybody remember the play Aged in Wood, by the famous
Broadway playwright Lloyd Richards? It ran at the Golden in
1949. It starred the legendary Broadway actress Margo Channing, and it was during the run of Aged in Wood that Miss Channing befriended a shy young fan from San Francisco who briefly
became her girl Friday. Soon, however, Eve Harrington managed
not only to sabotage Margo Channing’s career, but her friends
and love life as well. By now, movie lovers will realize that Aged
in Wood was not a real drama, but the play in the film All About
Eve, which starred Bette Davis as Margo and Anne Baxter as
Eve. Few people realize that the Golden Theater was also in the
film—but if you watch carefully, and if you know your theaterdistrict geography, it’s easy to figure out that the Golden is
definitely the Broadway house—with the Royale and the Booth
theaters visible just up the street beyond it—that was used for All
About Eve’s second-unit exteriors.
Now, fasten your seat belts for an even more esoteric bit of
All About Eve trivia. What show was playing next door at the
Royale Theater while Aged in Wood was at the Golden? Answer:
The Devil’s Disciple, starring Maurice Evans, which actually was
playing at the Royale in 1949,


BROADWAY:

17.

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

IMPERIAL

THEATER

249

45th

West

117

Street

In the 1959 Douglas Sirk tearjerker Imitation of Life, Lana
Turner stars as Lora Meredith, a single mother down on her
luck until she gets a big break and becomes one of Broadway’s
leading comedic actresses. Unhappy with her lightweight roles,
Lana/Lora longs for meatier subject matter. Her dramatic debut
is here at the Imperial Theater in No Greater Lady. The irony is
that the 1,650-seat Imperial has traditionally been known as
one of Broadway’s best musical-comedy venues. Over the years
it’s hosted such legendary hits as Oliver!, Fiddler on the Roof,
Cabaret, Pippin, Dreamgirls, and Chess.
18.

ROYALE
242

West

THEATER
45th

Street

It was a bizarre bit of casting: a blond, blue-eyed, all-American
young man from Indiana in the role of a homosexual North
African houseboy named Bachir. But that’s the part that James
Dean played in a dramatization of André Gide’s novel The Immoralist, which opened at the Royale Theater on February 1,
1954. After constant battles during out-of-town tryouts with the
play’s director, Daniel Mann, Dean further antagonized his director on opening night by lifting up his native robe and curtsying
to the Royale audience during his curtain call. Mr. Mann was not
amused by Jimmy’s jest—nor by the fact that he announced the
same night that he was leaving the show in two weeks to do a
film in Hollywood. Unbeknownst to anyone, during previews of
The Immoralist, Elia Kazan had secretly approached Jimmy and
given him a screen test for East of Eden. Despite his abrupt departure from the cast, Dean nonetheless won a Theater World
Award as a “promising newcomer” of the 1953-54 season on
the basis of his stage performance at the Royale.
The following season, a British musical opened at the Royale
on September 30, springing another amazingly talented newcomer onto the Broadway stage. The show was The Boy Friend,
and its magnificent young star was Julie Andrews, who would go
on to dazzle New York audiences as Eliza Doolittle in My Fair


118

NEW

YORK:

THE *MiOV TE MRO VERS SG uiDiIE

Lady before achieving superstardom in Hollywood (but not in
the film version of My Fair Lady, which went to Audrey Hepburn). Another Royale production of interest to movie lovers is
the 1961 debut of Tennessee Williams’s The Night of the Iguana,

which brought Bette Davis back to the Broadway stage just before the What Ever Happened to Baby Jane? (1962) phase of her
film career.
In May 1988, the Royale saw the stage debut of pop star and
sometimes film actress Madonna, who played a secretary in
David Mamet’s Speed-the-Plow. The diva got mixed reviews, but
the house was packed with celebrities every night and the street
was mobbed by fans and paparazzi. When Madonna tried her
luck on the London stage in the summer of 2003, in an Australian play called Up for Grabs, which was specially rewritten
and reset in the United States for her, she got some of the worst
reviews in the history of the theater. Nonetheless, the show was
still the hottest ticket in town.
19.

LYCEUM
149

West

THEATER
45th

Street

New York’s oldest surviving theater that is still being used for legitimate productions, the Lyceum, with its ornate facade of
sculpted limestone punctuated by five fat fluted columns and
three huge arched windows, is also one of the city’s most handsome houses. Built in 1903 by a then famous theatrical producer,
Daniel Frohman, the Lyceum contained Frohman’s living quarters above the second balcony, and he frequently made use of a
special secret window that looked down on the stage to phone
directions to his cast and crews! Today Frohman’s former
Lyceum apartment houses the archives of the Shubert Theater
Organization.
On July 12, 1912, the Lyceum hosted a very important event
in motion-picture history, when a private screening was held
there of a revolutionary European film version of Queen Elizabeth starring the great French actress Sarah Bernhardt. The film
was revolutionary because it lasted for a then unheard-of fifty
minutes and because it featured a major actress instead of one of
the anonymous beauties that populated most early movies. The


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

Sarah Bernhardt on-screen:

ENTERTAINMENT!

119

Queen Elizabeth, 1912
I

EE

LE

American rights to Queen Elizabeth had just been purchased by
a little man named Adolph Zukor, who planned both to market
Queen Elizabeth in America and to set up a company that would
film famous stage stars in famous plays. Which is where the
Lyceum comes into the story—since producer Daniel Frohman
was one of the partners that Zukor had recruited for his bold
venture. Frohman would be particularly valuable to the new
Famous Players Film Company (one of the companies that eventually formed Paramount Pictures) because he would supply the
stars, the plays, and the theatrical clout to get Famous Players’
pictures off the ground.
Soon, through films like His Neighbor’s Wife with Lillie
Langtry, The Prisoner of Zenda with Jakes K. Hackett, and The
Count of Monte Cristo with James O’Neill (Eugene O’Neill’s father), the new Famous Players Film Company primed the public’s taste for their trademark “Bigger and Better Pictures.” And
when this happened, not only did appearing on-screen lose its
stigma for stage stars, but other American producers jumped on


120

NEW!

YORK:

"TME IMiOV TER FOVERYS

“GUIIDIE

the bandwagon and began coming out with longer films. In a
matter of months, short films, which had been the staple of the
American motion-picture industry for the first fifteen years of its
existence, went out of fashion, and the “feature craze” began.
For film historians, it began at the Lyceum.
Another beginning at the Lyceum was that of the film career
of Bette Davis, who was discovered in 1930 by an executive from
Universal while she was in a play there called The Solid South.
Davis went directly from the Lyceum stage to Hollywood to appear in Bad Sister (1931), in which she played the good sister.
Actually, this was not the first time that Bette had been discoyered on Broadway. The year before she had been seen in a play
called Broken Dishes at the Ritz Theater and was given a screen
test by the Samuel Goldwyn Company in New York. When Sam
Goldwyn saw Bette’s test, he is quoted as having said: “Who did
this to me?”

Bette Davis on
Broadway—with

Duncan Penwarden
in Broken Dishes,

1929


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

fj
ia

121

Lyceum Theater

Movie lovers can see the ornate Lyceum lobby in the 1947
theatrical thriller A Double Life, starring Ronald Colman as an
actor who takes his Othello a little too seriously. The theater is
also where Tom Ripley (Matt Damon) works as a projectionist
before leaving for Italy and a new identity and life in The Talented Mr. Ripley (1999). The Julia Roberts 2003 vehicle Mona
Lisa Smile also has a Lyceum sequence.
20.

CHURCH
145

West

OF

ST.

46th

MARY

THE

VIRGIN

Street

Beautifully restored in the 1990s, this French Gothic-style
church is actually an Episcopal house of worship. Noted for its
high-church liturgy and incense-infused rituals, the church is
nicknamed Smoky Mary’s. Popular with theater folk, St. Mary’s
has also turned up in several New York movies: In Changing
Lanes (2002), it’s the site of Ben Affleck’s AA meeting, whereas


122

NEW:YOIRKG:”

T HERMON

TES EO WER eS mii S iD iE

in Woody Allen’s Small Time Crooks (2000), its elegant Old

World chapel doubles for a church in Venice, Italy, where posh
Hugh Grant has taken nouveau riche New Yorker Tracey Ullman for a bit of high culture. At a concert in the chapel, Ullman
annoys everyone by chatting on her cell phone.
21.

HIGH
120

SCHOOL
West

46th

OF

PERFORMING

ARTS

SITE

Street

Liza Minnelli went here, as did Al Pacino, Eartha Kitt, Diahann
Carroll, Michelle Lee, Dom DeLuise, and Melissa Manchester.
Ultimately, however, New York City’s High School of the Per-

forming Arts will be remembered less for the famous show folk
it has trained than for the famous film that it inspired: Fame.
While Fame was shot entirely in New York, one city location
that never saw any action during the filming was the High School
of the Performing Arts! At the time (1979), the board of education refused to allow the school to be used because it didn’t
approve of the profanity, sex, or recreational drug use called for
by the script. In fact, it looked at one point as though Fame

Fame on West 46th Street, 1979


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

25

might have to find a high school in another city. That’s when the
Mayor’s Office of Film, Theater, and ‘Broadcasting stepped in
and came up with the abandoned (and now demolished) Haaren
High building on Tenth Avenue and 59th Street—no longer un-

der board of ed control—for the location.
Meanwhile, the real High School of Performing Arts closed
down in 1984, when the board of education merged it with New
York City’s High School of Music and Art to become the La
Guardia High School on Amsterdam Avenue, behind Lincoln
Center. Performing Arts’ former West 46th Street home is now
the Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis High School, specializing in
training students for careers in international business and government.
22.

JOE

ALLEN

326

West

46th

Street

Opened in 1965 by a former actor named Joe Allen, this unpretentious brick-walled pub/restaurant has been one of Broadway’s
top hangouts for working actors for four decades. An egalitarian
place, Joe Allen is popular with kids in the chorus as well as with
superstars like Elizabeth Taylor, who could usually be found dining on Joe Allen’s famous chili after the curtain came down on
her Broadway debut run in The Little Foxes in 1981. Joe Allen
is also known for its burgers (currently $10), barbecued ribs,
meat loaf, calves’ liver, steak, and pan-fried chicken—all served
in a room plastered with posters of such famous flops as Moose
Murders,

which

brought

1940s/1950s

TV star Eve Arden to

Broadway for about ten minutes in 1983, to Phantom of the
Opera Michael Crawford’s 2003 bomb Dance of the Vampires.
Many customers request to be seated next to their favorite flop.
Movie lovers can find Joe Allen clones in Paris, London, and
Miami. The original New York venue was featured in the 1968
film No Way to Treat a Lady, where detective George Segal
comes here following a lead in his search for serial killer Rod
Steiger. When a drag queen regular leaves with a strange-looking
older woman, Segal realizes something’s not quite right, but not
before a murder is committed. Woody Allen also used the restaurant for a scene in his 2004 Melinda and Melinda. And getting


124

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOV

TLESEO
V ERAS eG iibie

back to bombs, Joe Allen’s was a location for Al Pacino’s
straight-to-video People I Know (2001), which looked at the life
of notorious New York PR flack Bobby Zarem.
Visit www joeallenrestaurant.com.

23.

ETHEL
243

BARRYMORE

West

47th

THEATER

Street

Built in 1928 and named for the then reigning queen of the
American theater, Ethel Barrymore, this historic house, with
the distinctive neon sign on its marquee, was recently the site of
the monster hit play A Woman to Love by one of the country’s
most successful playwrights, Erika Barry. The play, which is
based on an older woman’s falling in love with her daughter’s
sixty-three-year-old boyfriend, is decidedly autobiographical.
And for anyone reading this, the play was never really on Broadway at the Barrymore or anywhere else. But it was in the
movies—as the fictional drama in the 2003 Nancy Meyers film
Something’s Got to Give, which won a Golden Globe for Diane

Keaton as the playwright in love with Jack Nicholson.
A few real dramas at the Barrymore that may interest movie
lovers include Clare Boothe Luce’s 1936 celebration of bitchery,
The Women, which became a classic 1939 George Cukor film;
Tennessee Williams’s landmark A Streetcar Named Desire,

which opened in 1947 and made Marlon Brando astar; and a
1992 revival of the same Williams play, which brought movie
stars Jessica Lange and Alec Baldwin to Broadway.
24.

PALACE
1564

THEATER

Broadway

The gold plaque backstage reads: “This was the dressing room
of Judy Garland who set the all-time long-run record October
16, 1951, to February 24, 1952, at the RKO-Palace Theatre.”
For Garland fans, the Palace is not just where Judy started her
concert career in the United States, it is the sacred spot where she
proved that her talent was far greater than anyone had previ-

ously imagined. Fed by a live audience, Garland in person went


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

125

beyond anything she had ever done on film. Ultimately, the legend of Judy Garland was not born on the MGM soundstages,
but on the stage of the Palace Theater.
The idea of having Judy play the Palace was that of producer
Sid Luft, who eventually became her third husband. Down on
her luck, Judy had been suspended by MGM in June 1950 for
not showing up for the shooting of The Barclays of Broadway.
Then, two days later, there had been a much publicized suicide

attempt in which she tried to slash her throat. As far as Hollywood studio executives were concerned, Judy Garland was no
longer bankable. Unable to work in America, Judy wound up
doing a series of concerts in England in 1951. They were highly
successful, but on her return to America the only jobs her agents
were able to line up for her were some radio guest shots. Clearly,
drastic measures needed to be taken in order to show Hollywood—and America—the talent that had taken England by
storm. And for Sid Luft, the Palace was the ticket.
Judy at the Palace was very much acase of being in the right
place at the right time. In 1951, the great Temple of Vaudeville,
which opened in 1913, and which had seen headliners like Sophie
Tucker, Eddie Cantor, the Marx Brothers, Kate Smith, Fred Astaire, W. C. Fields, Fanny Brice, and Ethel Merman in its halcyon
days, was a tattered remnant of its former self. Vaudeville was
finished, and the theater had gone from a policy of stage
show-plus-movie to just showing films—and not first-runs.
Luft’s plan was to get RKO (which owned the theater) to refurbish the historic house for what would be not just Judy’s U.S. concert debut, but the return of “two-a-day” vaudeville to the
Palace. And so it came to pass that Judy Garland, backed up by

comedian Alan King, acrobats, and various other variety acts, did
two shows a day at the Palace for nineteen weeks in 1951-52.
Of her opening night, her biographer Gerold Frank writes in

Judy (Harper & Row, 1975) that it “was the biggest night Times
Square had known since D-Day.” Of her performance, in which
she not only sang but re-created several classic production numbers from her films (“Get Happy” from Summer Stock, “A Couple of Swells” from Easter Parade), one reviewer called it “the
most fantastic one-hour solo performance in theater history.”
For her fans, seeing her on the Palace stage represented her tri-


126

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

umph over Hollywood, over the suicide attempts, the bad press,
the drugs, and the bad times. But the euphoria didn’t last long.
Three weeks into the run, Judy collapsed onstage and had to be
taken to a hospital. Diagnosed as suffering from “nervous exhaustion,” she returned to the Palace five nights later and was
welcomed back with practically as much enthusiasm and acclaim
as on opening night. Only Judy could make a comeback within
a comeback. It was the first of many, many more. The pattern,
like the legend, was born at the Palace.
Judy was followed at the Palace by more Hollywood names:
Betty Hutton, Danny Kaye, Jerry Lewis, then Judy herself returned in 1956—again to rave reviews. But a year later, the theater reverted to showing movies, and it wasn’t until 1965 that it
was refurbished and went legit once again. Its first production
was Bob Fosse’s Sweet Charity, starring Gwen Verdon. Its second
production was—guess who?—Judy Garland, this time with her
three children—Liza Minnelli, Lorna and Joey Luft—as part of
the act. Besides Judy Garland, another Hollywood great who has
had more than just a casual association with the Palace is Lauren Bacall. In 1970 she starred at the Palace in Applause, the musical version of All About Eve, and won a Tony Award for her
performance. (In a clever bit of replacement casting, Anne Baxter, who had played the role of Eve Harrington in the film All
About Eve, took over the role of Margo Channing in Applause
when Bacall left to do the show in London.) In 1981, Bacall returned to the Palace as the star of Woman of the Year, the Broad-

way musical version of the classic Spencer Tracy—Katharine
Hepburn film. Again, Bacall won a Tony for her performance in
a Broadway musical based on a Hollywood dramatic film. And
in another clever bit of replacement casting, Raquel Welch took
over the role when Bacall went on vacation for a couple of weeks
toward the end of the run. Raquel, to everyone’s surprise, got
wonderful reviews from the New York critics. Supposedly, the
person least pleased with Raquel’s notices was Miss Bacall who,
when she returned to the Palace, is reported to have sulked in her
dressing room.
In 1994, theater history was again made at the Palace when
Walt Disney took Broadway by storm with a lavish live musical
version of its recent animated hit Beauty and the Beast. The


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

27

show ran at the Palace for five years before transferring to the
nearby Lunt-Fontanne, but Disney quickly returned in 2000 with
another innovative musical, Aida, the Elton John—Tim Rice ver-

sion of the Verdi opera.
25.1.

MILLER

Northeast

BUILDING
corner

of 47th

Street

and

Broadway

“The Show Folks Shoe Shop Dedicated to Beauty in Footwear.”
So says the inscription on the 47th Street side of this little twostory building on Broadway, which was once a branch of the
I. Miller Shoe Company that specialized in dance and theater
footwear. Today, Times Square tourists eat pizza and drink beer
at TGIE, where they used to try on shoes, but if movie lovers look
up when they pass the old I. Miller building along West 47th
Street, they will be treated to a wonderful gallery of statues
immortalizing famous women in show business. Fashioned by
A. Stirling Calder—father of mobile-maven Alexander Calder—
the star statues include Mary Pickford, Ethel Barrymore, diva
Rosa Ponselle, and Ziegfeld Follies headliner Marilyn Miller.

Star statues at |. Miller Building
a


128

NEW!

YORK:

THE

IMOVIE

EOV ERS “GUT DE

While movie lovers may not realize that Miss Miller appeared in
a few early sound films, they will remember the 1949 Warner
Bros. film version of her life, Look for the Silver Lining, which
starred June Haver. They may also remember Judy Garland’s
cameo performance as Miss Miller in MGM’s 1946 film version
of Jerome Kern’s life, Till the Clouds Roll By, in which Judy sang
“Who?” and “Look for the Silver Lining.”
26.

CORT
138

THEATER

West

48th

Street

Known as a “lucky house” because of the many long runs that
played here early in its history, the Cort opened in 1912 with
Laurette Taylor starring in Peg o’ My Heart, which ran for two
years. One of its medium runs was The Jazz Singer, which played
315 performances between 1925 and 1926, starred George Jessel, and was quickly turned into the world’s first commercially
successful motion picture with sound (starring Al Jolson—not
George Jessel).
Other Cort productions of interest to movie lovers may be the
1949 revival of Swedish playwright August Strindberg’s The
Father, which featured the Broadway debut of a beautiful young
actress from Philadelphia named Grace Kelly, and the three-night
(not so lucky?) run of a play called See the Jaguar in 1952, which
nonetheless put James Dean on a Broadway stage for the first
time.
In 1955, a teenager from Brooklyn made her way across the
East River to Manhattan and the Cort Theater to see The Diary
of Anne Frank, which was a big hit at the time. It was Barbra

Streisand’s first time in a Broadway theater . . . but not her last.
Between 1969 and 1973, the Cort had a stint as a TV studio,
during which time The Merv Griffin Show was the theater’s principal tenant.
In 1997, the Cort hosted the hottest show in town, a transplant of British playwright David Hare’s The Blue Room, which
featured movie star Nicole Kidman playing a number of different
roles, one involving partial nudity. Miss Kidman went to great
pains in interviews to point out that she was wearing a body
stocking, but many who saw the show weren’t quite so sure.


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

129

Broadway debut:
Grace Kelly

(with Mady Christians)
in The Father, 1949

27.

ST.

MALACHY’S

CHURCH

239

West

Street

49th

AND

ACTORS

CHAPEL

In the heart of the theater district, St. Malachy’s is a Roman
Catholic church with a separate Actors Chapel where show folk
can escape the crazy world of making rounds and/or actually
working in theater and films in New York.
In August 1926, St. Malachy’s was the scene of the world’s
most famous show-business funeral—that of Rudolph Valentino.
It began with his untimely death from a bleeding ulcer and peritonitis at New York Polyclinic Hospital on Monday, August 23.
It continued at Frank Campbell’s Funeral Church, which at the
time was on Broadway at 66th Street. At Campbell’s, there were
mobs of mourners, special police patrols, and all sorts of rumors.
These ranged from speculation that Valentino had been murdered, to stories that a wax dummy and not Valentino’s body
was on display at Campbell’s, in case someone in the unruly
crowd tried to desecrate the corpse.


130

NEW

YOIRIKi

THEIMIONV

TES OVERS

SGi00/D'E

Amid all the rumors and pandemonium, one thing was certain: United Artists, the studio behind Valentino’s most recent
pictures, was going to make the most of the situation. Hollywood had learned from the premature deaths of other 1920s
superstars like Barbara La Marr and Wallace Reid that the public forgot quickly. So this time, they would do things right.
Valentino’s would be the most carefully orchestrated—and wellpublicized—star funeral in the history of the movie business.
Plans called for the body to lie in state at Campbell’s for a full
week, after which a funeral Mass would be said at St. Malachy’s
on Monday, August 30. This posed one small problem, however,
because Valentino had been twice divorced and therefore, in the
eyes of the Catholic Church, which doesn’t recognize divorce, he
was not entitled to a Catholic burial. But where there’s a will,
there’s a way—both in Hollywood and in Rome—and it was
later decided that since both of Valentino’s marriages had been
contracted in civil courts, and not in Catholic churches, both
were invalid. Thus, the “bachelor” star was entitled to a full
High Requiem send-off.
SE

Rudolph Valentino


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

131

The St. Malachy’s funeral was quite a spectacle. Shopkeepers
and apartment dwellers on 49th Street charged outsiders to view
the proceedings from their fire escapes and rooftops. Indeed, it
seemed more like a premiere than a funeral as cheers from the
crowds greeted arriving stars like Gloria Swanson, Douglas
Fairbanks, George Jessel, Hope Hampton, and Marilyn Miller.
The featured attraction, naturally, was Valentino, whose rosebedecked coffin was followed by such close friends as Norma
and Constance Talmadge, Mary Pickford, and Pola Negri, the
Polish-born star who claimed to be Valentino’s last lover and
whose dramatic performance as mourner extraordinaire—complete with frequent faintings and designer widow’s weeds—was
the subject of much publicity.
After the church services, it was back to Frank Campbell’s
again, where the body remained for another two days (special
permission had to be obtained from the commissioner of health
for the body to stay aboveground for so long) in order for Valentino’s brother, who was en route from Italy, to pay his last
respects. With the arrival of the actor’s brother, the show continued with a five-day train journey to Los Angeles, where there
was yet another star-studded funeral at the Church of the Good
Shepherd in Beverly Hills. Finally, a good two weeks after his
death, Valentino was laid to rest in crypt number 1205 of the
Cathedral Mausoleum at the Hollywood Memorial Park (now
Hollywood Forever) Cemetery.
The two-week funeral festival was a great success, by the way.
United Artists couldn’t make enough prints of Valentino’s two
latest films, The Eagle and The Son of the Sheik, to satisfy the
demands of exhibitors. In fact, much to the studio’s delight,
Valentino was raking in more money in death than he had in life.
Which just goes to prove that with the right publicity campaign,
a dead legend can be worth more than a live superstar.
It was also at St. Malachy’s that, on June 3, 1929, Joan Crawford married Douglas Fairbanks Jr.
Visit www.stmalachyschurch.org.


132

28.

NEW

BRILL
1619

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

EOVERS (GW

DiE

BUILDING
Broadway

Welcome to Tin Pan Alley. New York’s historic headquarters for
music publicists, arrangers, and booking agents, the Brill Building was once the nerve center of the nation’s songwriting business. Today, aside from a few exceptions like Charing Cross
Music and Paul Simon, who have offices here, the building is no
longer the exclusive domain of the music industry in New York,
just as New York is no longer the force it once was in the music
business. Indeed the days when songwriters made the rounds of
the Brill’s offices and hung out in the Turf restaurant (now the
Colony music store) on its ground floor are gone.
The Brill Building—with its gleaming brass entrance and lobby
of more brass, plus mirrors and marble—is still a classy structure,
and it has been featured in two classic made-in—New York motion
pictures: The House on 92nd Street (1945) and Sweet Smell of

Tin Pan Alley central:
Brill Building


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

133

Success (1957). In the first, the Brill doubled as a talent agency; in

the second, it was supposedly Burt Lancaster’s apartment house.
More recently, the site also inspired and was used in writerdirector Allison Anders’s 1996 film Grace of My Heart, which
chronicled the life of a 1960s female songwriter (Illeana Douglas) in the mold of Brill Building alumna Carole King. The Brill
Building also pops up in numerous Woody Allen films, including
Broadway Danny Rose (1983), Hollywood Ending (2002), and
Anything Else (2003). The building gets its name, by the way,
not from anybody in show business, but from the Brill brothers,
who were the haberdashers who originally built and occupied the
place, then just two stories, in 1929. In 1933, major alterations
brought more stories and more glamorous tenants.
29.

ROXY

THEATER

Northeast

corner

SITE
of

50th

Street

and

Seventh

Avenue

It was the “Cathedral of the Motion Picture,” the ultimate movie
palace—the one and only Roxy Theater. When it opened on
March 11, 1927, the publicity blurbs boasted: “We cannot find
adjectives and superlatives strong enough to describe the
thousand-and-one wonders and innovations of the Roxy, truly

the most sumptuous and stupendous theater ever erected.” And
that it was, with 5,920 seats, six box offices, a five-story grand
foyer and rotunda, ushers in black tie, dazzling Baroque decor,
lounges, smoking rooms, hospital rooms, plus three organ con-

soles, twenty-one-bell cathedral chimes, a resident symphony
orchestra of 110 musicians and four conductors, a chorus of one
hundred voices, and a ballet company of fifty dancers.
The Roxy not only marked the apogee of the Age of the
Movie Palace, it represented the high point in the career of S. L.
Rothapfel, the famous theater entrepreneur whose nickname,
Roxy, was immortalized by this great new entertainment estab-

lishment. The premiere attraction at the Roxy was The Love
of Sunya, a made-in—New York film that had been produced
by, and also starred, la Marquise de la Falaise de la Coudraye; to
millions of movie lovers la Marquise was better known as good
old Gloria Swanson. Swanson, in her autobiography, Swanson


134

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Roxy Theater, ca. 1935

on Swanson (Random House, 1980), had this to say of the glam-

orous 1927 premiere of the Roxy and of her film:
When we pulled up under the marquee and got out of the car,
a tremendous roar went up. In the blinding glare of a double
row of klieg lights trained on the shiny new building, I turned
and waved, and before I could turn back again and enter the
theater, an unstoppable wave of people surged forward and almost knocked us over. In spite of the efforts of the police, we
had to fight our way into the lobby in order not to be crushed
against the closed doors and walls.
Inside the monumental foyer, in front of an inclined bank
of red and white carnations that spelled out his name, Roxy
stood with his family, being photographed with celebrities.
Henri [Swanson’s husband, the marquis] and I joined them to
kiss and shake hands with the people we knew in a steady
blaze of flash powder. Roxy had pulled out all the stops. The
parade of notables included four U.S. senators, three U.S. generals, three consul generals, two borough presidents, the governor of New Jersey, and the minister of Lithuania, as well
as Adolph Ochs, Mrs. Otto Kahn, and Mr. and Mrs. Jimmy
Walker. The crowd almost broke down the doors when Char-


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

135

lie Chaplin tried to sneak in unnoticed, and they went wild
again when they recognized Harold Lloyd and his wife. We
stood there for twenty minutes and greeted an endless stream
of people with engraved invitations: the Shuberts, Irving
Berlin, Lois Wilson, Sport Ward, Hope Hampton, Tommy
Meighan, Joe Schenck, Walter Wanger, Will Hays—even Jesse
Lasky. Then we all took our seats down front in the great
auditorium, and the show began.

The show at the Roxy would go on for over three decades, and
Swanson would be on hand for the theater’s demolition in 1960,
just as she had been for its gala opening in 1927. For the sad
event, Gloria turned up in a black evening sheath and a feather
boa to bid farewell not only to a theater, but to an era. Today, an
electronics store as well as the glass-and-marble American Management Association Building occupy the famous corner where
the Roxy once stood. There ought to be a plaque—but there
isn’t. Movie lovers can, however, get a glimpse of the Roxy in the
film The Naked City (1948), which uses the theater’s foyer for
several sequences.
30.

CADILLAC WINTER
1634 Broadway

GARDEN

THEATER

In 1911, the year it opened, the Winter Garden featured Al Jolson—the actor who would revolutionize the motion-picture industry with his sound success in The Jazz Singer some fifteen
years later—in a musical called Vera Violetta. Also in the cast
was a comedian who would go on to be a major force in the
movies with her sexually explicit screen antics in the 1930s. Her
name was Mae West.

Another major Hollywood name to appear on the Winter
Garden stage early in his career was an Italian immigrant who
made up half of a dance team called Glass and Di Valentina. At
the time, the dancer had already changed his last name from
Guglielmi to Di Valentina, but things wouldn’t really click for
him until he settled on Rudolph Valentino. An equally famous
Hollywood name change also played the Winter Garden before
heading to California. The show was a lavish revue called The
Passing Show of 1924 and one of the gals in the chorus was


136

NEW

YOIRKe

HIE

IM OVJ

ESTOVERsS

GW iDIE

a sexy lady from San Antonio named Lucille Le Sueur. When
MGM spotted her on Broadway and signed her to a contract, the
studio conducted a nationwide contest to find a suitable name
for their new starlet. The winning name: Joan Crawford.
Speaking of Hollywood, in 1928 Warner Bros. took over the
Winter Garden and made it a showplace for the company’s new
Vitaphone talking pictures, which held forth at the theater
through 1933—when it was featured in Warner’s Gold Diggers
of 1933. The place subsequently went legit again and from 1935
to 1940 employed Vincente Minnelli as its “revue master,” during a period when the theater specialized in producing dazzling
musical extravaganzas in memory of the late Florenz Ziegfeld.
Besides directing these spectacles, Minnelli, who had previously
been art director at Radio City Music Hall, also designed the sets
and costumes. Some of the future film stars who appeared in
Minnelli’s Winter Garden productions were Eve Arden, Ethel
Waters, Eleanor Powell, and Bob Hope.
Besides serving as a springboard for Hollywood talent, the
Winter Garden has also been a place for film stars to stage their
Broadway comebacks. Two cases in point: Rosalind Russell,
who brought new life to her career when she took Broadway by
storm in Wonderful Town in 1953, and Angela Lansbury, whose
film roles had dwindled to playing the world’s bitchiest women
(as in The Manchurian Candidate and The World of Henry Orient), became a talent to reckon with after she scored a knockout
on the Winter Garden stage in 1966 with Mame.
And of course, there is Barbra Streisand, who starred at the
Winter Garden as Fanny Brice—the legendary comedian who
had frequently played that theater in her heyday—in Funny Girl.
Streisand went direct from the Winter Garden to Hollywood to
star in, and win an Oscar for, the film version of Funny Girl.
Since then, she has never returned to Broadway. But even bigger
than Barbra was Cats, which opened at the Winter Garden in

1982 and closed eighteen years later, making it the longest running play in Broadway history, logging 7,485 performances. After a year of cleaning up after all those kitty-cats, the theater
reopened with a new musical from ABBA called Mamma Mia
and a new name—the Cadillac Winter Garden—reflecting its
posh new corporate sponsor.


BROADWAY:

31.

MARK

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

HELLINGER

THEATER/TIMES

Sz

SQUARE

CHURCH
237

West

Sist

Street

Opened in 1930 as a Warner Bros. movie palace, this theaterturned-church was originally called the Hollywood. The theater’s architect/designer was the noted Thomas W. Lamb and his
spectacular interior of sweeping staircases, ornate columns, and
exotic balconies is still one of the most flamboyant of any legit

house on Broadway. For the first two decades of its life, the Hollywood kept changing its name as well as its format, switching
back and forth from films to stage shows to films. During one of
its legit periods, the 1939 George White’s Scandals had the late
Ann Miller tapping on Broadway for the first time. The trooper
would be back on the same stage of what was now the Mark
Hellinger forty years later in one of the theater’s biggest hits,
Sugar Babies (1979), which costarred Mickey Rooney and ran
for 1,208 performances—not one of which did Ann miss.

As successful as the Sugar Babies run was, it was not the
Mark Hellinger’s longest. That honor is still held by My Fair
Lady, which starred Rex Harrison and Julie Andrews in the
original cast and ran for 2,717 performances between 1956 and
1962. After My Fair Lady, the Hellinger saw two Hollywood legends grace its stage in the late 1960s: Marlene Dietrich, who in
1968 based her one-woman show, which had been a smash
hit the year before at the Lunt-Fontanne on West 46th Street, at
the Hellinger, and Katharine Hepburn, who made her Broad-

way musical-comedy debut as the revolutionary French fashion
designer Coco Chanel, in Alan Jay Lerner and André Previn’s

1969 Coco.
During a dark period in 1985, the Mark Hellinger was taken
over by director Richard Attenborough and turned into a movie
studio. The project was the long-awaited film version of the supersmash Broadway hit A Chorus Line, which was shot entirely
at the Mark Hellinger. A critical disaster, the film quickly faded
from view, as did the Mark Hellinger, which has been the Times
Square Church since 1989.
Visit www.timessquarechurch.org.


138

32.

NEW

BROADWAY
1681

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

THEATER

Broadway

Opened in 1924 with Douglas Fairbanks starring in The Thief of
Baghdad, this 1,765-seat theater spent the first years of its life as
a motion picture/vaudeville palace known as the Colony. For
movie lovers, a premiere of monumental importance took place
at the Colony on November 18, 1928. The film ran barely eight
minutes, but its impact is still being felt around the world and its
star is probably the most famous of any screen personality in history. The title of the little movie was Steamboat Willie, and it unleashed a mouse named Mickey upon the world. Also in the cast
were Minnie Mouse and a villain named Pete. While it was
Mickey Mouse who brought fame and fortune to Walt Disney,
this was not Disney’s first cartoon character or cartoon series. In
1924, in partnership with his brother Roy, Disney came out with
the Alice in Cartoonland shorts, which were followed by Oswald
the Rabbit. But neither Alice nor Oswald was a match for the
mouse that took off and soared from the Colony movie screen
back in 1928.
In 1930, the Colony changed its name to the Broadway, when
it became a legit house for a few years. Then, in the mid-1930s,
it went back to running films, went legit again in 1940, and—
except for a brief stint showing Cinerama wide-wide-wide-screen
flicks in the 1950s—has remained so ever since. Because of its
vast stage and large seating capacity, the Broadway is often used
for musicals. Among its top productions over the years have
been Gypsy (1959), which starred Ethel Merman; Andrew Lloyd
Webber and Tim Rice’s Evita (1979), the musical—which became a Madonna movie in 1996—based on the legendary Argentine dictator-superstar, Eva Perén; Les Misérables (1987),
followed by Miss Saigon in 1991, which ran for a recordbreaking ten years. Most recently, after the success of his 2001
film Moulin Rouge, with Nicole Kidman and Ewan McGregor,

Australian director Baz Luhrmann turned to full-out opera with
his redo of La Bohéme, which had a run—in French with super-

titles—at the Broadway in 2003.


BROADWAY:

33.

STAGE
834

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

139

DELICATESSEN

Seventh

Avenue

A popular Broadway nosh-spot since 1937, the Stage—with its
blintzes, matzo ball soup, and massive sandwiches—is a throw-

back to a different culinary world in these days of low-fat, lowcarb fad dining. For filmmakers—like Woody Allen, who used
it in his 2003 Anything Else—a Stage dining sequence shows
New York at its no-nonsense best. Not a place for a glamorous
evening, it’s more of a drop-in spot, such as when jaded soap
opera star Kevin Kline invites the ingenue of the moment to have
a bite at the Stage after a hard day of taping in Soapdish (1991).
It’s also where Sandra Bullock and her Brit boss Hugh Grant go
for a taste of New York in Two Weeks Notice (2002). The nearby Carnegie Deli just up the street at 854 Seventh Avenue offers
a similar menu and filmmakers a similar ambience. Its most
memorable screen appearance was as a hangout for old comics

in Woody Allen’s 1984 Broadway Danny Rose.
Visit www.stagedeli.com.

34.

ED

SULLIVAN

1697

THEATER

Broadway

The Ed Sullivan opened its arched Gothic doors in 1927 as Hammerstein’s Theater and featured a film—plus-variety show format. Four years later, the house went legit and hosted Broadway
productions. Then in 1934, showman Billy Rose took over the
place for his lavish musical stage shows. Two years after that,
CBS stepped in and Hammerstein’s became the CBS Radio Playhouse. The theater’s grandest era began in the early 1950s, when
CBS brought in bright lights, built camera runways, and used
what it now called Studio 50 for some of its most famous television variety shows, including the Jackie Gleason Show, the
Garry Moore Show (which gave Carol Burnett her prime-time
boost), and, of course, the show to which the theater now owes
its name, the Ed Sullivan Show (originally called Ed Sullivan’s
Toast of the Town). Still a vital part of NYC’s TV scene, the
theater was used to tape the Kate & Allie sitcom before alive au-


140

NEW

David Letterman’s
SS

a

YORK:

THE

®MOVIE

ELOVERS

GUIDE

Broadway home: Ed Sullivan Theater
a

aEI

EE EIT,

CE

dience in the 1970s—but its current main claim to fame is the
fact that it’s been home to The Late Show with David Letterman
since 1993. In 2002, ABC made a bid to lure Letterman away
from his CBS roost, offering him megabucks in a deal that would
have had him replace veteran ABC newsman Ted Koppel’s Night
Line. The negotiations were top secret, but whatever ABC offered, CBS topped them. Indeed, it was reported at the time that
Letterman’s new deal with the network was worth some $71 million a year for him and his production company.
The Ed Sullivan Theater is a historic site not only because of
all the stars who have appeared on its stage, but also because of
the legendary acting school—Lee and Paula Strasberg’s Actors
Studio—that once occupied the fourteenth floor of the building.
It was here that unknowns like Shelley Winters, Marlon Brando,
James Dean, Eli Wallach, Rod Steiger, and Kim Stanley learned
their craft. It was also here that one very well-known film star—
Marilyn Monroe—came to perfect hers. Although she started off
studying privately with Lee Strasberg, she eventually joined the


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

141

group class. Remembering one of Marilyn’s early scenes, the late
Kim Stanley said, “We were taught never to clap at the Actors
Studio—it was like a church—and it was the first time I’d ever
heard applause there.” Of Miss Monroe’s talent, Lee Strasberg
once observed: “I have worked with hundreds and hundreds of
actors and actresses, and there are only two that stand out way
above the rest. Number one is Marlon Brando, and the second
is Marilyn Monroe.” The Actors Studio was at 1697 Broadway
between 1948 and 1955; today it is located at 432 West 44th
Street.
35.

STUDIO
254

West

54
54th

Street

Formerly a CBS TV studio, Studio 54 came on the NYC nightlife
scene on April 16, 1977. The brainchild of Long Island restaurateurs Steve Rubell and Ian Schrager, the club was the ultimate
disco in an era when disco fever ran rampant. While Schrager
handled the back-of-house business, Rubell was always out front
carefully handpicking who got inside the ultraexclusive enclave.
The result was a hip mix of celebrities like Liza Minnelli, Halston, Bianca Jagger, and Andy Warhol plus a corps of buffed and
beautiful gay party boys. By the end of the decade, however, the
club, still as popular as ever, ran into big trouble when fifty federal agents raided the place, tipped off by reports of drugs and
unreported cash. Rubell and Schrager were arrested and eventually did jail time for tax evasion. By the time they got out, the
party that was the hedonistic 1970s was over, and a new reality
in the form of a killer disease called AIDS made the 1980s a
much less festive, much more frightening decade. Indeed, Rubell
himself died of AIDS in 1989, shortly after he and Schrager had
founded a string of chic boutique hotels like the Royalton and
Paramount.
On the film front, 54 (1998) tells some of the famous nightclub’s story, with Mike Myers as Steve Rubell. Shot mainly in
Toronto, the film used the real Studio 54 exterior. The club is
also featured in Spike Lee’s 1970s period piece Summer of Sam
(1999), where John Leguizamo and his girlfriend Mira Sorvino
are turned away at the velvet ropes of the trendy spot. Studio 54


142

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

was also used in I Shot Andy Warhol (1996). Now home to New

York City’s Roundabout Theatre company, Studio 54 has hosted
theatrical productions such as the revival of John Kander and
Fred Ebb’s Cabaret and more recently Stephen Sondheim’s Assassins.
36.

SONY
460

MUSIC
West

STUDIOS

54th

Street

Now Sony Music’s NYC base, this historic studio building was
known as the Fox Stage for decades, since it was originally part
of Twentieth Century—-Fox’s New York operations. From the
1950s to the 1970s, Fox dropped out of the picture, but the studio continued in the picture business in a big way, becoming one
of the busiest rental stages in New York. Among the many features shot at 460 West 54th Street were On the Waterfront
(1954), Middle of the Night (1959), Fail Safe (1964), The Pawnbroker (1964), The Group (1966), The Owl and the Pussycat
(1970), Where’s Poppa? (1970), Shaft (1971), and The Exorcist
(1974). During the shooting of the last film, which dealt with a

young girl’s possession by the devil, all sorts of strange goings-on

Twentieth Century-Fox soundstage, Tenth Avenue and 54th Street


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

143

were reported on the old Fox Stage—from film that didn’t develop properly to a fire and other hard-to-account-for accidents.
Since then, some industry insiders now refer to the place as the
Exorcist studio.
In addition to feature films, 460 West 54th Street also counts
Inner Sanctum, The Reporter, and I Spy among the TV series
that have been filmed here. Today, in addition to recording studios, the Sony facility uses the building’s historic soundstages to
shoot music videos. Movie lovers who visit the site should check
out the murals on the 53rd Street side of the facility, which de-

pict recording and video sessions.
37.

WILLIAM

FOX

STUDIOS

444

56th

Street

West

SITE

Now a New York City high school specializing in environmental
studies, this big brick building was where movie mogul William
Fox kept watch over his impressive empire during most of the
1920s. Fox, who was brought to America as an infant by his
Hungarian immigrant parents, grew up in poverty on New York
City’s Lower East Side. Dropping out of school at the age of
eleven, he slaved in the garment industry for much of his youth.
In 1903, at the age of twenty-four, he spent his life savings of
$1,660 to buy a 146-seat movie theater in Brooklyn. When this
venture earned him some $50,000 over the next five years, Fox
reinvested the money into more movie houses and eventually got

into the production side of the industry as well. At the height of
his power in the late 1920s, Fox had assets valued at $300 million, which included studios in Los Angeles and New York, plus
over fifteen hundred movie theaters across the country.
But 1929 was a bad year for William Fox. On March 3 of that
year, he was poised to become the most powerful man in the
movie business when he finalized a deal to purchase the controlling interest in his principal competitor, Loew’s Inc. This maneuver would have given Fox all of Loew’s theaters as well as their
production arm, MGM

Studios. But Fox had gone too far, and

the U.S. government stepped in and prevented the transaction
from going through. Then, as Fox was fighting the government
decision, he was seriously injured in an automobile accident that
laid him up for three months. To make a bad situation even


144

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

worse, along came the stock market crash, which had a devastat-

ing effect on the William Fox Company. One of the ways the
company’s other directors dealt with its serious financial troubles
was to ease William Fox out of the business. In fact, by 1934,
when the Fox organization had joined with Twentieth Century
Pictures to form Twentieth Century-Fox, William Fox was no

longer in the corporate picture.
Even without Fox, his New York offices stayed under Twentieth Century-Fox control until the 1970s, when John Jay College of Criminal Justice took over the property. When they exited
the building in the 1990s, the New York City Department of
Education moved in and converted it into a high school.
38.

HEARST
959

MAGAZINE

Eighth

BUILDING

Avenue

His empire was vast and encompassed newspapers, motionpicture studios, hotels, real estate, and magazines. His taste was

extravagant, especially when it came to architecture and design.
His California homes—a fantastic castle on 50,000 acres in the
north, and a 118-room beach “cottage” in the south—back in
the 1920s and 1930s were playgrounds for the biggest names in

Hollywood, all of whom flocked to the parties and weekends
frequently staged at these fabulous places by his movie-star
mistress, Marion Davies. At Eighth Avenue, between 56th and
57th streets in Manhattan, stands a smaller, but no less extrava-

gant monument to William Randolph Hearst’s sense of style: the
Hearst Magazine Building, a massive fortress extravagantly decorated with columns, statues, and balustrades that remind one of
the Jugendstil buildings of turn-of-the-century Vienna.
Created to house the magazine division of Hearst’s empire,
this spectacular 1928 structure was the work of Joseph Urban, a
man less well known as an architect than as a set and costume
designer. Urban went from decorating Florenz Ziegfeld’s Follies
to becoming artistic director of the Metropolitan Opera as well
as a famous art director for early movies. One of Urban’s landmark films was the 1921 production of Enchantment, which is

believed to have been the first American film to use Modernist
sets. Not surprisingly, the producer of Enchantment was William


BROADWAY:

THAT’S

ENTERTAINMENT!

145

Art director as architect: Joseph Urban’s Hearst Magazine Building,

1987

Randolph Hearst, and the star of the film was Marion Davies.
On designing for films, Urban had this to say to Photoplay in
1920: “The motion picture offers incomparably the greatest field
to any creative artist of brush or blueprint today. It is the art of
the twentieth century and perhaps the greatest art of modern
times. It is all so young, so fresh, so untried. It is like an unknown ocean stretching out before a modern Columbus.” During the 1920s, Urban would design some twenty-five films for
Hearst. While many of these are lost, Urban’s work can still be
appreciated at 959 Eighth Avenue. The six-story building, by the
way, was originally intended to have another seven stories rise
above it. In 2003, work was finally started on an addition—a futuristic glass tower designed by the eminent British architect Sir
Norman Foster. Whether Urban would have approved is anybody’s guess.
Visit www.hearstcorp.com/tower.


146

39.

NEW

MORK

CBS

BROADCAST

524

West

57th

THE

MOVE

BOW ERS

eGUiipiE

CENTER

Street

Spanning most of the south side of 57th Street between Tenth
and Eleventh Avenues, this giant broadcasting complex has
housed CBS’s main radio and television studios since 1953. The
CBS Evening News, 60 Minutes, 48 Hours, and Living It Up!
are all done here. Until recently Politically Incorrect was headquartered here—as was, until late 1999, the indomitable soap
opera As the World Turns (which is now shot at the old Vitagraph studio in Brooklyn).
Once upon a time in the late-1960s, some eight soap operas
were broadcast from CBS’s West 57th Street facility, and the
building reigned as the city’s premier “soap factory.” Productions at the time included Search for Tomorrow, The Secret
Storm, The Edge of Night, The Guiding Light, and Dark Shadows. During those heady days when West 57th Street was cranking out soaps the way Hollywood studios once cranked out
pictures, Anita Loos and Helen Hayes visited the CBS Broadcast
Center for their book Twice Over Lightly (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1972), which chronicled the two ladies’ madcap sightseeing adventures through New York. At CBS, they discovered
that the main studio building had formerly been a milk processing plant and that it had inherited quite a few flies from its previous life. The flies, it seems, were especially troublesome on
early soap sets, and many a scene had been stolen by an errant
insect landing on an actor’s nose. According to Loos and Hayes,
the situation had gotten so bad that production assistants armed
with fly swatters from Hammacher Schlemmer were needed to

stand guard during shootings.
Today, most of the flies have abandoned West 57th Street—as
have the soap operas.
