New Jersey: In the Beginning

For all intents and purposes, the motion picture as we have come
to know it was born in the late 1880s some sixteen miles due
west of the island of Manhattan at the Edison laboratories in
West Orange, New Jersey. Recognizing that fact, we begin our
movie lover’s odyssey there. It wasn’t just the Edison Company,
however, that made New Jersey a powerful force in the early motion picture industry, because, from the very beginning, the state
was home to scores of other film companies. These included
long-forgotten studios with names like Centaur, Nestor, Champion, Eclair, Victor, Solax, and World—as well as many that are
still familiar, like Fox, Metro, Selznick, Goldwyn, and Universal.
All took advantage of New Jersey’s then wide-open spaces and
its pristine fields and forests for location shooting. The world’s
first Westerns were not done in Colorado or California—they
were done in New Jersey.
Needless to say, today’s New Jersey is a very different place
and tracking down traces of the state’s early film history can be
as challenging as working on an archaeological dig. But for the
intrepid movie lover who knows where to dig and what to look
for, the rewards to be unearthed along the west bank of the Hudson River are many. These range from ancient movie studios

2

NEW

YOR

Ke

THE

IMOVIE

OVERS

iGIUNiD'E

to famous and infamous silent film locations and even to the
world’s first screening room.
Easier to find are the sites and locales associated with New
Jersey’s current big comeback on the film and television front—
especially with the popularity of shows like The Sopanos and Ed.
This chapter also explores this exciting new New Jersey world.
1. EDISON

LABORATORY

Main

and

Street

Lakeside

Avenue,

West

Orange

For the movie lover, this is probably the single most important
site connected with the development of the motion picture in
America—if not the world—for it was here that, toward the end
of the nineteenth century, Edison researchers perfected and successfully marketed a practical system for photographing and exhibiting moving images. Thomas Alva Edison is often credited as
the inventor of the movies, but it is difficult to attribute this
achievement to any one person since various inventors in America and abroad were experimenting with “moving pictures” at
around the same time. And, indeed, even if we credit the Edison
Laboratory with coming up with the first commercially viable
motion pictures, it seems that Edison himself had relatively little
to do with the project.
The real force behind the endeavor was Edison’s assistant, an
Englishman named W. K. L. Dickson who, as early as 1889,
came up with a machine called the Kinetograph that showed
moving pictures backed up by synchronized sound provided by
an Edison phonograph. (It is said that the main reason Edison
gave his go-ahead to motion picture development was because
he saw the new medium as a way to further enhance—and thus
further capitalize on—his already immensely successful phonograph.) The big breakthrough made by Dickson’s device, however, was not the fact that it employed synchronized sound, but
the incredible realism of the moving images it recorded. To
achieve this, Dickson had taken advantage of George Eastman’s
newly invented celluloid film, which was thin, tough, and flexible. Cut into continuous 35mm strips and perforated with four
holes per frame, the film was fed through the Kinetograph by
means of sprockets, another key design element because these

NEW

JERSEY:

IN

THE

BEGINNING

3

3

a
=

The first mogul:
Thomas Alva Edison

=
a

a

=
aN

I

SAE Is SAE SO REI

NOOO

NOEL AE

OE

ES DS)

regularly stopped the film for that fraction of a second needed to
record the image on the frame. Today, more than a hundred
years later, even with the rise of digital technology, most motion
pictures still use 35mm film as well as this same basic stop-andgo sprocket mechanism.
In 1893, an improved version of this Kinetograph—redubbed
the Kinetoscope and minus the synchronized phonograph—was
unveiled at the Chicago World’s Fair. Essentially a coin-operated
peep show, the Kinetoscope was housed in a large wooden box
into which the viewer peered to see a silent movie lasting less
than a minute. Before long, Kinetoscope parlors started springing up all across the country, and Edison was in the motion
picture business in a big way. To provide product for these Kinetoscope parlors, and later for storefront nickelodeons, where motion pictures were projected onto screens, Dickson built the
world’s first movie studio at the West Orange laboratory in
1893. It was really nothing more than a tar paper-covered shack
with a roof that could be opened up and adjusted to let in sun-

4

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

light. In addition, the bizarre structure was mounted on wheels
so that it could be rotated to keep up with the sun throughout
the day. The studio was dubbed the Black Maria, because it resembled the police patrol wagons of the period, which bore the
same nickname.
What were the first Edison movies like? Directed by W. K. L.
Dickson, they relied heavily on vaudeville and circus performers
for talent—and showed snippets of everything from animal acts,
exotic dancers, and Gaiety Girls to 1890s superstars like Annie
Oakley and Buffalo Bill Cody. By the turn of the century, however, with the arrival of director Edwin S. Porter on the Edison
scene, the company’s films became longer and more sophisticated
and started to tell stories. It was Porter who in 1903 directed
what is considered the milestone of early story films, the elevenminute-long The Great Train Robbery.
Today, one of the treats in store for the movie lover who visits the Edison Laboratory site (now a museum administered by
the National Park Service) is the chance to see The Great Train

The first movie studio: Edison’s Black Maria
SS

TE

NEW

JERSEY:

IN

THE

BEGINNING

5

Robbery on a big screen in its entirety. Several less well-known
early Edison films are also shown: One features the original Little Egypt doing her famous hoochy-koochy; another is a slapstick comedy centering on a husband and wife’s attempts to swat
a giant fly. There’s even a bizarre sketch using trick photography
about a barber who removes the heads of his customers, shaves
them, and then replaces them!
For movie lovers, other highlights of the Edison Laboratory
site are the full-scale mock-up of the Black Maria studio, a working Kinetoscope from the 1890s, and Edison’s handsome private
library and study. A grand wood-paneled room with two balconied stories and a huge chandelier, the library has been left exactly as it was—down to the half-smoked cigars on the rolltop
desk—when Edison died in 1931. Especially interesting is the
little second-story projection booth that faces a large rolled-up
screen suspended from the ceiling across the way. Edison’s library, it turns out, was one of the world’s first screening rooms.
While Edison’s name is linked with many motion picture
firsts, it is ironic how small a role his company played in the
ultimate flourishing of the film industry. Immediately besieged
by rival producers using what Edison considered to be pirated
equipment, the Edison Company fought hard to retain supremacy in the movie business and summarily sued all competitors for
patent infringement. Eventually some of these competitors became so strong that Edison stopped fighting and joined with
them in 1908 to form the Motion Picture Patents Company. Effectively, this new organization was a business trust, and it was

ruled illegal and dissolved in 1915. By that time, however, the
competition from the outside was too strong and too innovative.
The company that started it all was out of the film business by
1918. But at the West Orange laboratory, the movie lover witnessed beginnings, not endings.
As this book goes to press, the Edison Laboratory is in the final
stages of a major restoration program
reopen to visitors in mid-2005,

that began in 2003. Set to

the facility will once again offer

guided and self-guided tours of its 1880s factory complex, which
will now feature both Thomas Edison's private laboratory as well as

his Music Room, where he auditioned singers and musicians for his

6

NEW"

YOIRIKK]

HIE

MON

IE

SEOVIER2S. G UN DIE

phonograph recording business. Nearby, Glenmont,

Edison’s

spectacular twenty-three-room red-brick Victorian mansion,

will

also be open to the public on weekend's. For information, call

973-736-5050 and visit www.crnps.gov/nr/twhp/curriculumkit/
lessons/edison/Aedison.htm.

2. CENTAUR
900

FILM

Broadway,

COMPANY

SITE

Bayonne

Strange as it may seem, Hollywood has its roots in Bayonne,
New Jersey. In 1911 the Bayonne-based producer David Horsley
took his company of New Jersey cowboys and Indians and relocated to the small Southern California community of Hollywood. While several other East Coast film companies had
already discovered the sunshine of Los Angeles (as well as its
convenient location some 2,500 miles from the strong arm of the
Edison-led Motion Picture Patents Company trust), Horsley’s

was the first to set up a permanent studio within the borders of
Hollywood proper.
But back to Bayonne, where a storefront—equipped with
bathtubs for developing film—was the Centaur Company’s headquarters from 1907 to 1911. Specializing in Westerns, Centaur

came out with such provocative titles as A Cowboy’s Escapade
(1908), Johnny and the Indian (1909), Redman’s Honor (1910),

The Cowboy Preacher (1910), and Those Jersey Cowpunchers

CENTAUR FILM Co.
900

Bayonne, 1908

NEW

JERSEY:

IN

THE

BEGINNING

7

(1910), which was a spoof on its own horse operas. When Centaur first came on the scene in 1907, unsophisticated nickelodeon
audiences didn’t know the difference between rural New Jersey
and the wilds of Wyoming, but as directors started to shoot in the
real West a few years later, a demand for more authentic locations
soon arose. This prompted Centaur to move into other genres, including a series based on the Mutt and Jeff comic strip. It also

prompted the company’s 1911 move to the West Coast.
Today, the spot where Centaur once had its Bayonne headquarters is occupied by a one-story brick-fronted dentist’s office.
While this is not the original Centaur office building, the clapboard structures on either side of it—Vector Books and a party
supply store respectively—were around in 1907. In fact, much of
this section of Broadway, Bayonne’s main street, is made up of
little wooden buildings that, in an odd way, do not look unlike
those of a small town out west.
3. THE
52

PENINSULA
Port

Terminal

AT

BAYONNE

Boulevard,

HARBOR
Bayonne

When the U.S. Army departed from Bayonne’s Military Ocean
Terminal in 1999, this vast 2.5-mile-long, 430-acre port was redeveloped for civilian uses with offices, storage areas, and a
cruise ship terminal. In a move to cater to New Jersey’s burgeoning film industry, two of its vast warehouses were turned into
soundstages for movies and television. It was in one of these that
HBO shot its prison series Oz for several seasons and where it
recently lensed the Glenn Close TV movie Strip Search (2003).

The busy new facility has also provided soundstages for the features A Beautiful Mind (2002), Two Weeks Notice (2002), Far
from Heaven (2002), Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind
(2004), and The Forgotten (2004).
4. STANLEY
2932

John

THEATER

SITE

F. Kennedy

Boulevard,

Jersey

City

Old-timers will remember the enormous rooftop sign that once
proclaimed, “The Stanley . . . One of America’s Great Theaters.”
And that it was. With 4,332 seats, the Stanley was one of the

8

NEW

YORK

THE

MOV

IEMEOV ERS

GUIDE

largest movie palaces ever built. Then there was its lobby, a spectacular space of faux-marble columns, grand staircases, cloudpainted ceilings, and glittering chandeliers. Finally, the house
itself was a stunner—with walls of backlit, three-dimensional
Gothic facades, including a replica of Venice’s Rialto Bridge
spanning the stage.
The Stanley opened its ornate brass doors back in 1928 with
a mixed bill that featured a prerecorded welcome message by
Norma Talmadge, a performance by the house orchestra, a stage
show called Sky Blues, a newsreel, musical selections on the
Wurlitzer organ, and eventually the film presentation, which was
The Dove, starring the aforementioned Miss Talmadge and

Gilbert Roland.
The Stanley survived as a theater for fifty years and, despite
its enormous size, never suffered the ignominy of multiplexing.
When it finally closed down in 1978, however, it was a prime
candidate for the wrecking ball. Luckily, it escaped this fate
when the Jehovah’s Witnesses purchased the building in the early
1980s to use as a convention center, bringing some 5,500 volunteers to Jersey City to help with its restoration. While most
preservationists applaud the saving of the Stanley, some regret
that the theater’s original Willy Pogany murals, which featured
scantily clad Greek gods and goddesses, have been replaced by
biblical scenes. Nonetheless, the good news is that the Stanley
still stands, and movie lovers who wish to take a peek at it can
stop by on a weekend when thousands of Jehovah’s Witnesses
converge on the place for meetings, religious services, and baptisms. A far cry from Norma Talmadge, Gilbert Roland, and Sky
Blues, however.

5. LOEW’S
54

JERSEY

Journal

THEATER

Square,

Jersey

City

Opened in 1929, this Journal Square landmark—boasting a
wonderful baroque facade with a mechanical statue of the
mounted St. George that periodically slays a dragon—was the
most opulent movie palace ever built in New Jersey. Designed by
the noted theatrical architectural firm of Rapp and Rapp, the
dazzling gold Loew’s Jersey auditorium seated 3,187 movie

NEW

JERSEY:

IN

THE

BEGINNING

o

Loew’s Jersey

Theater, Jersey
City, ca. 1930

lovers who had first passed under an equally dramatic threestory lobby rotunda supported by jade green columns. Although
triplexed in 1974, the Jersey retained much of its original splendor right up to the day it closed its doors in the summer of 1986.
What followed were years of plans, schemes, and disputes
about the theater’s future—not to mention brushes with demolition. A happy ending eventually came when apreservationist
group managed to get the theater de-triplexed, restored, and reopened as an entertainment and performing arts center for the
Jersey City community. Today, a vital aspect of the theater’s new
life is its film program, which features classic films as they were
meant to be shown—on the big screen.
For film program details, call 201-798-6055 and visit
www.loews/ersey.org.

NEW

10

6. OUR
400

YORK:

THE

LOVER’S

MOVIE

GUIDE

LADY OF GRACE CHURCH
Willow Avenue, Hoboken

It was the picture of 1954—an incredible collaboration of New
York-based talent that brought together director Elia Kazan,
screenwriter Budd Schulberg, composer Leonard Bernstein, plus a
cast headed by Marlon Brando, and featuring Eva Marie Saint,
Karl Malden, Lee J. Cobb, Martin Balsam, and Rod Steiger. And
when Hollywood handed out the Academy Awards that year, On
the Waterfront received no less than eight of them, including best
picture, director, actor (Brando), and supporting actress (Saint).
Not bad for an independent, low-budget, made-in—New York film.
Made in New York perhaps, but it was shot largely on location in Hoboken, the little town directly across the Hudson River
from Greenwich Village in Lower Manhattan. In the 1950s,
Hoboken, like New York City, was a thriving port, and it pro-

On the Waterfront in Hoboken:

Eva Marie Saint, Marlon Brando, and

Timothy Carey at Our Lady of Grace Church
aa

aE

a

a

I

I

NEW

JERSEY:

IN

THE

BEGINNING

11

vided an ideal setting for Kazan’s hard-nosed look at the very
real corruption that was an ugly fact of waterfront life in New
York and New Jersey. (The film was based on a series of shocking newspaper articles by muckraking journalist Malcolm Johnson.) Today, the Hoboken docks and warehouses that served

as backgrounds for On the Waterfront have been transformed
into shops, offices, condos, and marinas. One important location from the film does survive, however: the Roman Catholic church where the crusading priest played by Karl Malden
helped Brando’s failed prizefighter-turned-longshoreman realize
the forces of evil lurking in his union. For the church, Kazan

chose Hoboken’s historic 1874 Our Lady of Grace, a striking
brick structure with a statue-studded Gothic facade and an ornate interior. Perhaps this interior was a bit too grand for Kazan,
because a different, much more austere church (Hoboken’s Sts.
Peter and Paul at 400 Hudson Street) was used for the interior

scenes.
Fans of On the Waterfront may also remember that a number
of scenes take place in front of the church, including a touching
love scene between Brando and Eva Marie Saint, where the two
of them are sitting on a children’s swing set. A bit of cinematic
trickery was involved in these sequences as well. The shots that
show Our Lady of Grace Church in the background were done
in the park that’s directly across the street; but when we see
Brando and Saint looking out at the murky waterfront in the
same scene, a different park (Stevens Park, which fronts Sts. Peter and Paul Church) was used. Films often use a combination of
sites to create one location. By “cheating the location,” that is,
using two churches and two parks, Kazan was able to move the
more photogenic Our Lady of Grace some four blocks away
from where it really stood and magically reposition it . . . on the
waterfront.
7. FRANK
841

SINATRA

Garden

HOUSE

Street,

Hoboken

The house where Francis Albert Sinatra was born on December
12, 1915, stood at 415 Monroe Street in Hoboken. It was demolished in 1968, and a parking lot now marks the spot. But

12

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Sinatra fans can still check out the skinny three-story brownstone on Garden Street, where Hoboken’s most famous native
son spent his late teen years. Sinatra’s father, Marty, was an
Italian immigrant who had a string of jobs—boxer, bootlegger, saloon keeper, and fireman. Sinatra’s mother, Dolly, as the
world has learned from Kitty Kelley’s “unauthorized” Sinatra
biography, His Way (Bantam Books, 1986), was said to have
performed illegal abortions in the basement of this same Hoboken house.
Young Sinatra, who attended Hoboken High School but
never graduated, got his first break as a singer when he and three
friends, appearing as the Hoboken Four, won a Major Bowes
Amateur Hour radio show contest in 1935. This led to a tour,
nightclub gigs, stints as vocalist with both Harry James’s and
Tommy Dorsey’s bands, and by the early 1940s Sinatra had become the country’s number-one teen idol.
With his great success as a singer, Sinatra was tapped by Hol-

Hoboken’s favorite
son: Francis Albert

Sinatra

NEW

JERSEY:

IN

THE

BEGINNING

13

Frank Sinatra’s
Hoboken

home

lywood to appear in a number of fluffy 1940s musicals, but by
the early 1950s, both his singing and film careers were on the
downswing. Attacked by the House Un-American Activities
Committee for supposed Communist affiliations, and by the
press for alleged Mafia contacts, Sinatra was, as he said in a
1980s talk at the Yale Law School, “busted.”

The surprise was that his acting ability, not his singing voice,
brought about his comeback—notably through his Oscarwinning performance as Private Angelo Maggio in the 1953 film
From Here to Eternity. With the roles that followed—in The
Man with the Golden Arm, Pal Joey, and High Society—the kid
from Hoboken wound up one of the most powerful figures in the
entertainment industry.
Throughout the years, Sinatra, who died in California in
1998, had very little to do with his hometown. Among his few
and far between visits were a highly publicized stop in 1947 for
Frank Sinatra Day; a 1952 appearance at a benefit for the Inter-

14

NEW

YORK:

THE IM OV TEME OWE RAS eG UW DiE

national Firefighters orchestrated by his fireman father; and a
1984 drop-by, to accompany his Hollywood pal Ronald Reagan
to St. Anne’s Church on the Feast of St. Anne (a holy day dedicated to pregnant women), where the president was to deliver a
nationwide message against legalized abortions. Needless to say,
the irony of Sinatra’s presence at the event was not lost on some

Hoboken old-timers who remembered what supposedly once
went on in the basement of 841 Garden Street.
Today, Sinatra lovers who visit Hoboken will find, in addition
to his childhood home, a pretty little park named for the singer,
which was dedicated in 1998. Edging the Hudson, with great
views of Manhattan, Frank Sinatra Park—off Frank Sinatra
Drive—has benches, a soccer field, a launch for canoes and
kayaks, and the Frank Sinatra Café, serving burgers and beer.
8. FORT

LEE

Known to most New Yorkers as the town on the Jersey side of
the George Washington Bridge (and to movie audiences as the
suburb that was home to Rosanna Arquette in Desperately Seeking Susan and Ray Liotta in Goodfellas), Fort Lee is a booming
community of upscale condos, corporate headquarters, hotels,
and some of the highest commercial real estate prices in the
Northeast. It wasn’t always like this. At the beginning of the century, Fort Lee was a rural village surrounded by green hills,
forests, and farms, with the added geographic distinction of being bounded by the dramatic Palisades cliffs and the Hudson
River. Despite the fact that Fort Lee was easy to get to from Upper Manhattan via ferry boat (the George Washington Bridge
wasn’t built until 1931), the town was worlds away from the big
city on the other side of the Hudson, and this fact was not lost
on early film directors, who quickly came to see Fort Lee as the
ultimate rural “location.”
One of the first directors to discover Fort Lee was Edwin S.
Porter, who in 1907 (working out of Edison’s Manhattan studio
at 41 East Twenty-first Street) used the towering cliffs of Fort
Lee’s Palisades for the exteriors of Rescued from the Eagle’s
Nest, a melodramatic yarn about a baby kidnapped by an eagle.
In the film, the role of the mountaineer who saves the baby was

NEW

JERSEY:

IN

THE

BEGINNING

15

ie
BIS OW ER PICT URES

Fort Lee romance:

Tallulah Bankhead

368%

and Tom Moore in Thirty a

Week, 1918
a

aaa

a

a

eS

a

SES ES

played by a young actor named D. W. Griffith. A year later,
Griffith would move to the other side of the camera to become a
director at Biograph, and in this new role, he would often return
to shoot in Fort Lee. Among Griffith’s most important Fort Lee
films are The Curtain Pole (1908), a slapstick comedy starring
Mack Sennett before he, too, became an important director/producer; The Lonely Villa (1909), featuring Mary Pickford in her
first performance on screen; The Battle (1911), in which Griffith

developed many of the photographic techniques that he would
later employ in his landmark The Birth of a Nation; and The
New York Hat (1912), with its all-star cast including Pickford
and Sennett, as well as Lionel Barrymore, Mae Marsh, and Lil-

lian and Dorothy Gish in a story written by a fifteen-year-old
schoolgirl from San Diego named Anita Loos.
Besides the scenic variety that Fort Lee offered as a location,
the town provided an even more important commodity to the
rapidly growing film industry—low-cost real estate—and soon a
number of companies had built studios within its borders. The
first company to set up shop in Fort Lee was the Champion Film

16

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

ELOVER®S!

GUIDE

Company, opening on Fifth Street in 1909. Since Champion,
which specialized in East Coast Westerns, was not a member of
the Edison-led Motion Picture Patents Company, its Fort Lee facility was in constant danger of being closed down by this allpowerful trust of supposedly “legitimate” film producers. For
this reason, Champion built its studio partially below ground
level in order to disguise the fact that the building had a high ceiling and was actually a moviemaking installation.
Ironically, this little 1909 building is the only one of Fort Lee’s
many early movie studio structures that survives. Used today
as a printing plant, it sits where Fifth Street comes to a dead
end just beyond Washington Avenue. Across the street—actually
more of an alleyway—from the Champion site, the house at
2486 Fifth Street was frequently used as a location in early Westerns.
The great flourishing of Fort Lee’s film industry was from
1914 to 1919. By then, the Motion Picture Patents Company
was no longer a force to be reckoned with (it was declared illegal in 1915), the feature-length film had become the staple of the
movie business, and practically every major, and a number of minor, film companies had some kind of Fort Lee operation. Some
of the more memorable Fort Lee movie names—Goldwyn,
Selznick, Fox, Paramount, Universal, and Metro (the company
that would become the first M of MGM)—are still household
words. Other Fort Lee studios—Solax, Eclair, Victor, and Lincoln—are known only to hard-core film buffs and historians.
The scope of the moviemaking that went on in Fort Lee during its five-year heyday is astounding. For epics like Fox’s 1918
Les Misérables, nineteenth-century Paris was re-created on some
sixty acres of nearby farmland, and most of the townspeople
were recruited for the film’s cast of five thousand extras. It’s also
interesting to note that many famous films, which the world automatically assumes were produced in Hollywood, were actually
done in Fort Lee. An example is Fox’s A Fool There Was (1945),
the vehicle that launched a Cincinnati tailor’s daughter named
Theodosia Goodman as the country’s sultriest siren. (Wisely, Fox
changed her name to Theda Bara.) It was also in Fort Lee, not
Hollywood, that Mack Sennett made several entries in his Fatty
(Arbuckle) and Mabel (Normand) series.

NEW

JERSEYS

WN

THE

BE GINNING

17

Alas, for all that went on in Fort Lee (some historians have
calculated that Fort Lee in its heyday was responsible for 50 percent of all the feature films produced in the United States), the
end came quickly. With the country’s involvement in World War
I, the government made it difficult for eastern movie studios to
secure the coal they needed to heat their plants and, as a result,
many companies headed to the warm West. A postwar economic
slump further enhanced Southern California’s hold on the film
industry, since budget-conscious companies realized that it was
just too expensive to have bicoastal production operations.
Forced to choose between coasts, producers went with winterfree Southern California, and Fort Lee was finished.
Even sadder than Fort Lee’s sudden demise as a film capital is
the fact that almost nothing remains to remind the world of the
city’s glorious moviemaking years. Other than the print shop on
Fifth Street that once was the city’s first film studio, intrepid
movie lovers will have to search hard for any tangible evidence
of Fort Lee’s movie history. But the city is waking up to its film

Fort Lee epic: Les Misérables, 1918

18

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

history, so the pale-blue clapboard house over at 2423 First
Street, for example, now finally has a plaque that indicates that
it was once an establishment called Rambo’s Hotel. A popular
hangout for film folk who ferried over from Manhattan to work
in Fort Lee back in the 1910s, Rambo’s also furnished an exterior for many made-in-—Fort Lee features.
Another vestige of that same era was a big Victorian house a
block away at 2405 Hammet Avenue, which once belonged to
America’s most famous theatrical family, the Fabulous Barrymores. All three Barrymore children—Ethel, John, and Lionel—
worked in silent films on the East Coast, and some of those were
made at Fort Lee. Unfortunately, the house was demolished in
2000 after a much-publicized battle waged by local preservation-

ists to save it. Out of the defeat came a new appreciation by
many Fort Lee citizens of the city’s film legacy—and this translated into support for a film commission as well as a museum,
which is now at 1588 Palisades Avenue and which has permanent displays of film stills and other historic movie memorabilia.
In addition to visiting the museum, movie lovers coming to
Fort Lee will find several sites of interest on Main Street, which

was once lined with so many studios that it was known as Studio Row. Although none of the actual buildings remain, recently
the Film Commission dedicated plaques to mark particularly historic spots. The intersection of Main and Linwood Avenue, for
example, has been renamed Theda Bara Way, in honor of the
great silent-screen vamp who once made pictures at the Fox Studios, which were on the western side of the corner. Three more
plaques (with photos and descriptions) can be found nearby in
Constitution Park, also on Linwood Avenue, where Fox, American Eclair, and World all had studios. It was on this site that the
Marx

Brothers made

their first film, Humor

Risk, in 1922.

Meanwhile, the town’s newest plaque can be found at the entrance to the Food Emporium at 3000 Lemoine Avenue, adjacent
to Fort Lee High School; it commemorates the first woman film
director, the French-born Alice Guy-Blaché, who built and ran

Solax Studios on this site from 1912 through World War I.
Granted, plaques go only so far in commemorating the days
when a small New Jersey town played a major role in the history
of the American motion picture industry—but for a long time

NEW

JERSEY:

IN

THE

BEGINNING

19

there weren’t even any of those. Another heartening development
is the Film Commission’s Cliffhanger Film Festival, held twice a
year, which focuses on classic and often rare New Jersey-made
films. Given the fact that some screenings are held at the restored
Loew’s Jersey Theater (see item 5) in nearby Jersey City, the festival does its best to bring back the grand old days.
The Fort Lee Museum

is open weekends from 12 noon to 4 p.m.

For information on both the museum

and on Fort Lee’s Cliffhanger

Film Festivals, call 201-592-3663 and visit www.fortleefilm.org.

9. “PEARL
Palisades

WHITE

MEMORIAL

Interstate

Park,

CLIFF”
Coytesville

To the moviegoers of the early twentieth century, the term cliffhanger was likely to bring up the image of a hero or heroine confronting some life-threatening situation—from being tied to the
railroad tracks with the train approaching to actually hanging
from a cliff—at the end of an episode of one of the numerous serial films that swept the country between 1910 and World War I.
Of all the serial sirens who hung from cliffs in silent-film days,

Cliff-hanger: Pearl White atop the Palisades for The House of Hate, 1918

20

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

the actress who reigned as Queen of the Cliff-hangers was Pearl
White. She starred not only in the legendary Perils of Pauline but
also in a string of other serials with such titles as The Exploits of
Elaine, The Iron Claw, The Fatal Ring, The House of Hate, and

Black Secret. Most of Pearl’s films were produced by Jersey
City-based Pathé Studios with the financial backing of newspaper magnate William Randolph Hearst, who bolstered the circulation of his papers by running the serial in print at the same time
as it appeared on screen.
When Pearl White needed a cliff to hang from, Coytesville’s
Palisades provided some of the steepest of any on the East Coast,
with one that was a particular favorite of early moviemakers.
Large and flat enough to accommodate several actors as well as
a cameraman, it also jutted out a good 250 feet above the Hudson River in an especially dramatic—and photogenic—fashion.
Today, this cliff of cliffs is unchanged, except that the George
Washington Bridge now looms to the south.
Pearl White's cliff is not easy to find and should be visited only by

the most intrepid of movie lovers. To reach the site, drive (a car is
a must) north from the George

Washington Bridge along the

Palisades Interstate Parkway about two miles to the first gas
station on the right. Pull in, park, and then backtrack south by foot

for about ten minutes along the path until you reach a large

clearing in the park. Continue walking south beyond the clearing
for another hundred feet or so. Off to the left, you'll find a grasscovered step that leads to the cliff, as well as to a glorious view of

the George Washington Bridge, the Hudson River, and Upper
Manhattan.

Be very careful, however, because it’s very steep, very

dangerous!

10.

GEORGE
Fort

WASHINGTON

BRIDGE

Lee

Almost a mile long, this sleek silver suspension bridge spanning
the Hudson River between Fort Lee and Upper Manhattan was
considered the “most beautiful bridge in the world” by the Swiss
architect Le Corbusier. Since the George Washington Bridge is a
relative newcomer on the New York City bridge scene (it was

NEW

JERSEY:

IN

THE

BEGINNING

21

completed in 1931), it has never had the same landmark appeal
to filmmakers as, say, the Brooklyn Bridge, which is almost half
a century older. Still, the George Washington Bridge has been
featured in a number of famous films, and for some reason, it has
often spelled trouble!
A classic case in point is Ball of Fire, the 1942 comedy from
Samuel Goldwyn that has Barbara Stanwyck, a gangster’s moll
named Sugarpuss O’Shea, hiding from the police in a Manhattan
mansion inhabited by eight unmarried professors who’ve been
cooped up together for nine years revising an encyclopedia.
When one of them, the ultra-shy Bertram Potts (played by Gary
Cooper), falls for, and instantly proposes to, Sugarpuss, she
agrees to a marriage in New Jersey as a ploy to get herself out of
Manhattan and safely into the arms of her underworld boyfriend. Cut to: Stanwyck and the now top-hatted professors gliding across the George Washington Bridge in a glamorous touring
car en route to the bogus wedding. Warned by her boyfriend that
the bridge will be “swarming with cops,” Stanwyck has a very
close call when the professor driving the car (he’s the worst
driver on earth!) rear-ends another vehicle at the toll booth. After a very dicey couple of moments, Stanwyck charms her way
through the police, only to encounter real trouble later when she
realizes that she’s in love with Professor Potts (“He looks like a

giraffe and I love ’im”) and not her mobster man.
Another dreadful driver, Woody Allen, also has a rough go of
it crossing the George Washington Bridge in Manhattan Murder
Mystery (1996), as he and Diane Keaton pursue the neighbor
they assume has murdered his wife. Allen obsesses about having
an accident and is particularly afraid of hittinga school bus.
When Keaton points out to him that it’s night, Allen replies, “But
what about night school?”
In How to Marry a Millionaire (1953), Fred Clark and Betty
Grable also have some tense moments crossing the George Wash-

ington Bridge when returning from what the very married Mr.
Clark had hoped would be an amorous adventure at his lodge in
Maine with the very available Miss Grable. The Maine odyssey
has turned out to be a disaster for Clark, however. Not only did
Grable wind up catching the measles, she also fell for a handsome
forest ranger, Rory Calhoun. Despite the fact that Clark has

22

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

“LONMERSeo UNDE

struck out with Grable, he still takes great pains to keep the trip
secret from his wife and business associates. In fact, he boasts to
Betty of his cleverness in returning to the city via New Jersey
(“On this side of the river, no one knows me”). It’s therefore quite
a surprise when his 1953 Lincoln is met by sirens, police, and ultimately congratulations as he crosses the George Washington
Bridge. It is, it seems, “George Washington Bridge Week,” and
Clark’s car is the fifty millionth vehicle to cross the span.
On a decidedly darker note, the 1948 made-in—New York
film noir Force of Evil also features a George Washington Bridge
sequence. A depressing tale of the New York numbers game, the
film stars John Garfield as a lawyer trying to get the numbers legalized, while his brother is hopelessly caught up in the illegal
side of the racket. At the end of the film, Garfield finds his murdered brother’s body (“like some dirty rag that nobody wants”)
floating by the rocks alongside the Little Red Lighthouse under
the George Washington Bridge. More recently the lighthouse
figures in the harrowing climax of the 2003 Jane Campiondirected Meg Ryan thriller In the Cut. But to say too much more
would give away the ending.
As for good times, the bridge has had a few. Back on the New
Jersey side, for example, it’s at a carnival held under the magical
span that David Moscow makes a wish to be a grown-up—and
gets it, becoming Tom Hanks for most of the rest of the 1998 film
Big. And who can forget that archetypal GWB moment when the
Ricardos and the Mertzes cross the bridge in Ricky’s brand-new
1955 Pontiac convertible at the beginning of their legendary journey from Manhattan to California in I Love Lucy?
11. STUCKEYBOWL
199

Paris

Avenue,

Northvale

Formerly known as Country Club Bowling, this abandoned New
Jersey bowling alley with its orange-and-aqua color scheme and
its vintage vinyl furnishings serves as the central location for the
four-year run (2000-2004) of the NBC series Ed. Starring Tom
Cavanagh as a New York lawyer (Ed Stevens) who had returned
to his hometown (Stuckeyville) to start a new life after losing his
job and his wife in the Big Apple, Ed focused on Stevens’s new
career as a bowling alley owner/legal adviser. For the series, the

NEW

JERSEY:

IN

THE

BEGINNING

aS

old Country Club Bowling location was extensively redone by
removing twenty of the original thirty--six lanes to provide space
for production offices as well as soundstages. Meanwhile, Northvale and the surrounding towns of Montclair, Ridgewood, Westwood, and Hillsdale were used for other Stuckeyville locations.
For series star Tom Cavanagh, who called Ed “the best bowlingalley-romance-legal show on the air,” a bonus to filming at the
Northvale location was that he and cast members could bowl a
couple of frames during lunch.
12. SATIN
230

DOLLS

State

Route

17 South,

Lodi

Featuring topless pole dancers in G-strings, this classic roadhouse is where Tony Soprano and his buddies chill out from the
rigors ofa life of crime. A real-life location off Route 17, Satin
Dolls (Bada Bing on The Sopranos) is a bunker of a building that
features girls, beer, and biker nights.
For information, call 201-845-6494.

Satin Dolls: better known as Bada Bing in The Sopranos
aeT

TE

2

24

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Lambert’s Castle, Paterson

13.

LAMBERT’S
Valley

Road,

CASTLE
Paterson

With its thick stone walls and its crenellated turrets and towers,
Lambert’s Castle (originally called Belle Vista) was the fantasy
residence of nineteenth-century industrialist Catholina Lambert,
the town’s most important silk manufacturer. Built in 1892 and
furnished lavishly with an eclectic mix of European and Asian
antiques, the castle was an exercise in the nouveau riche ostentation typical of the times.
The visual power of the place was not lost on early filmmakers,
and the Edison Manufacturing Company (Thomas Edison was a
close friend of Lambert) is reported to have used the castle as a
background for some of its productions. D. W. Griffith also used
the castle as a location and, in 1910, shot a medieval adventure
there titled The Call to Arms, starring a young actor named Mack
Sennett. Sennett, of course, would soon become a director/producer and achieve world fame with his Keystone comedies.
Today, Lambert’s Castle is the headquarters of the Passaic
County Historical Society and is open to the public as a museum.

NEW

JERSEY:

IN

THE

BEGINNING

ZS:

Besides exploring this strange structure with its Victorian Gothic
interior of ornate twisted columns and sculpted plaster of Paris
walls, there is an additional reason for movie lovers to visit this

site. Just below the castle, on the flat grassy area between Route
80 and the hillside on which the property stands, the tracks of
the Lackawanna Railroad once ran. Although there is still some
debate among film historians on the subject, it is believed that
many of the train sequences of the landmark 1903 film, The
Great Train Robbery, were shot right down there. Important for
being the first American film to tell a dramatic story in a sophisticated, cinematic way—with cross cuts, multiple locations, care-

fully choreographed action and chase scenes, and a large cast of
actors and extras—The Great Train Robbery was also the first
Western.
The grounds of Lambert's Castle are open daily, from dawn to

dusk. The castle itself is open Wednesday through Sunday from 1
to 40.m. A nominal admission fee for adults includes a docentguided tour. For information, call 973-247-0085 and visit

www.lambertcastle.com.

The first Western: The Great Train Robbery, 1903

NEW

26

YORK:

THE

MOVIE
a

SS

LOVER’S

GUIDE

a

iemi?

Niagara in New Jersey: Great Falls, Paterson

14. GREAT
McBride

FALLS
Avenue,

Paterson

One of the little-known wonders of northern New Jersey, Paterson’s Great Falls are a thundering mini-version of Niagara. First
exploited by our country’s original secretary of the treasury,
Alexander Hamilton, the falls were harnessed to provide water

power for the budding industrial city Hamilton helped establish
at Paterson in 1791.

Toward the end of the nineteenth century, the falls were exploited in a different way by a pair of early filmmakers named
Albert E. Smith and J. Stuart Blackton. Both English immigrants,
the two were part of a vaudeville act called the International
Novelty Company. The novelty was that they had an Edison projector and showed films as part of their routine. Quickly realizing that it would be both cheaper and more satisfying to produce
their own films rather than to buy them from Edison, Smith

NEW

WER SIE YS

IN

THE

B EiGdin NiING

Uf

and Blackton figured out how to conyert their projector into a
camera, and they were off and running as moviemakers. At first
they shot street life, parades, prizefights—literally anything that
moved. By 1897, they were ready to take on something really
big, and decided to capture the power and majesty of Niagara
Falls on film. But when they discovered that there were some
pretty spectacular falls just twenty miles away in New Jersey,
Smith and Blackton saved both time and money by hopping over
to Paterson, where they shot the Great Falls and passed them off
to the world as Niagara. According to Smith’s autobiography,
the film was shown all over the eastern United States and no one
ever challenged its authenticity. The Vitagraph Hoax of 1897
may well have been the birth of serious special effects.
Today, Paterson’s Great Falls form the centerpiece of the
town’s National Historic Landmark District, a fascinating area
of museums, shops, and restored nineteenth-century mills and
factories. The falls are also still used as a film location, most notably in an early episode of The Sopranos, as the spot where
mobster Mickey Palmice threw a drug dealer to his death.
15. THE
16

SOPRANO
Aspen

Drive,

FAMILY
North

HOME
Caldwell

A long, tree-edged driveway leads to this grand modern mansion
with the big doorway and the distinctive bowed picture windows on either side. Like most of the homes in this upscale

Suburban splendor: The Sopranos family home
(CO

ES

28

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

‘ Family portrait:
the Sopranos

at their front door

Essex County community, this one has the standard-issue pool
and barbecue-ready patio in back. On television, this is the
home of Tony and Carmela Soprano and their kids, Meadow
and A.J. To his upper-middle-class neighbors, Tony runs a wastemanagement business, but to the millions of viewers who have
made HBO’s The Sopranos one of recent history’s most popular
nighttime television series ever, Tony has other business interests.
In real life, the Soprano mansion belongs to New Jersey builder
Victor Recchia and his wife, Patricia. The Recchias don’t appreciate gawkers on Aspen Drive, however, and have done their utmost
to keep the exact address of their home out of print. Their quest
for privacy did not keep them from making available a complete
set of blueprints of their $3.5 million, 6,000-square-foot property,
just in case some serious Sopranos fan wanted to build a Soprano
home of their own. The cost of the plans—recently available on
CD-ROM at www.sopranohomedesign.com—was $699.

NEW.

16.

JER Sim Yor IN! ST FEB

CAMP
11 Sand

NO

BE

Point

BO

ErGdiN NaNiG

SCO

Road,

29

vt
Route

818

Just south of the historic west Jersey hamlet of Blairstown, this
Boy Scout camp, which dates back to the 1920s, was Camp
Crystal Lake in the original Friday the 13th (1980). A scary little tale of a homicidal child named Jason set on avenging his
drowning many years earlier, this classic slasher film was inspired by the success of John Carpenter’s ultra-low-budget Halloween two years earlier. Much like its cash-cow inspiration,
Friday the 13th went on to spawn sequel after sequel after sequel. Playing a lead role in the 1980 original was a young Kevin
Bacon. Another cast member was veteran TV actress and game
show panelist Betsy Palmer as the monstrous Jason’s mother.
Like Camp No Be Bo Sco, Palmer went on to appear in several
of the film’s eight (and counting) sequels.
17. MORRISTOWN

One of north Jersey’s most beautiful and historic small towns,
Morristown was founded in the early 1700s and harbored Gen.
George Washington and his troops in the harsh winters of 1779
and 1780 during the War of Independence. With its leafy streets
and clapboard colonial houses, Morristown is a popular bedroom community for executives with offices in Manhattan,
thirty-nine miles east. This proximity to Manhattan also makes
Morristown a popular spot with New York location managers
looking for a motion-picture-perfect East Coast hamlet for TV
commercials, print ads, and the occasional feature.
In the screen adaptation of New York Times columnist Anna
Quindlen’s autobiographical novel One True Thing, 11 Farragut
Place provided the idyllic college-town colonial home for professor William Hurt and wife Meryl Streep and their children Renée
Zellweger and Tom Everett Scott. Documenting a mother’s brave
battle with cancer and her daughter’s own coming to terms with
her family, the 1998 film shot several weeks in Morristown as
well as at Riverside Cemetery in nearby Clinton for the inevitable funeral sequence. Ms. Streep, by the way, grew up in the
nearby New Jersey town of Bernardsville, where she appeared in

30

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIES

OWER?S +6 URE

Oklahoma her senior year at the local high school. The actress
has frequently quipped that the reason she does so many exotic
accents in film is because her own nasal New Jersey twang is so
boring.
In addition to One True Thing, Morristown can also be seen
in Firstborn (1984), Ed’s Next Move (1996), and The Emperor’s

Club (2002).
