
Brooklyn: Hometown of the Stars

Mae West, Mickey Rooney, Rita Hayworth, Barbra Streisand,
Mary Tyler Moore, Danny Kaye, Susan Hayward, Lena Horne,
Harvey Keitel, Gregory Hines, Woody Allen, George Gershwin,
Irving Thalberg, Veronica Lake, Clara Bow, Mel Brooks—the list
of megastars who hail from Brooklyn would make a sizable

who’s who of the entertainment industry. This chapter’s itinerary
takes in the actual sites where many of Brooklyn’s illustrious natives were born and raised and also visits such star Brooklyn
neighborhoods as Flatbush, with its leafy streets and landmark
mansions, one of which starred in the film Sophie’s Choice; Bensonhurst, land of Saturday Night Fever; Fort Greene, used by
Spike Lee; Coney Island, an inspiration to filmmakers from the
1890s to the present day; and Brooklyn Heights, whose ivycovered townhouses, landmark churches, and knockout views of
the Lower Manhattan skyline across the harbor have made it a
favorite location for New York movies.
Other discoveries awaiting movie lovers in Brooklyn are the
site of the legendary Vitagraph Studios, a major force in the film
industry at the turn of the century and still being used for television productions; New York City’s newest movie studio, within
the historic Brooklyn Navy Yard; Erasmus Hall High, boasting


NEW
JERSEY

Manhattan

Williamsburg Bridge >&/@enpoint
Manhattan Bridge

V 9

Brooklyn Bridge

1
i

7
2 4 GB

ae

Heights
: 5

11
fart Greene

Ath

Lax

12

anti
3 "Avenue
%

13

Z.

Prospect Park “2,

:
Q_Coméleries
:
Set x
yes

edford-Stuyvesant

15

.
Fast
1.
New York
|

A

Ze

Flathush
(see below)

\ Bay Ridge

27 28
pe

30

29 Bensonhurst

, Verrazano
Bridge

Coney Island
.

32 33

Thien
righton Beac

Atlantic Ocean

© 2004 Jeffrey L. Ward

ses?

gy

en"17

Albemarle: Road

Aafiny
peoy

Avenue
York
New
Uesd{)
anuany


é

BROOKLYN:

HOMETOWN

OF

THE

STARS

391

an impressive pedigree (it was founded in 1887), dazzling architecture, and stellar alumni; and Cypress Hills Cemetery, where
fans can pay their respects to Miss Mae West, who, despite her
fifty years in Hollywood, never forgot her Brooklyn roots, which
is true of the best of Brooklynites and is perhaps the secret of
their success: They always remember where they came from—
and therefore always know who they are.
1. BROOKLYN

BRIDGE

Joan Peers walked across it hand in hand with Henry Wadsworth in Rouben Mamoulian’s 1929 Applause and exclaims:
“Even Brooklyn looks pretty!”; Fredric March and Carole Lombard sailed under it in Nothing Sacred (1937); F. Scott Fitzgerald
wrote about it in Brooklyn Bridge (1940)—a script he did for a
Columbia film that was never produced; Johnny Weissmuller
dove off it in Tarzan’s New York Adventure (1944); Gene Kelly,

Frank Sinatra, and Jules Munshin danced over it in On the Town
(1949); Superman flew Lois Lane alongside it in Superman
SSS

Brooklyn Bridge, 1880s

OE

EI IEETEE

EY


S92

NEW

YORK.

THESMOMREMEOW

EiR SGU)

D5

(1978); Sidney Lumet covered it with yellow linoleum so that Diana Ross, Michael Jackson, and a cast of hundreds could “Ease
on Down the Road” across it in The Wiz (1978); Meryl Streep,
Kevin Kline, and Peter MacNicol drank champagne atop it in
Sophie’s Choice (1982); a dazed Bruce Willis weaved in and out
of traffic on it aboard a hospital gurney and angered motorists
no end in Hudson Hawk (1991); tanks rolled across it in a
terrorist-threatened New York City under martial law in The
Siege (1998); Hugh Jackman followed Liev Schreiber across it in
1876 (while it was still being built) and wound up in twentyfirst-century Manhattan in Kate and Leopold (2001); and there
have been hundreds more films that have taken advantage of
this architectural wonder of Gothic arches and spiderweb steel
cables—which took seventeen years, 1867 to 1883, to build—
linking Lower Manhattan with Brooklyn.
Arguably one of the most memorable film sequences featuring
the Brooklyn Bridge is in the 1978 disco-docudrama Saturday
Night Fever, when, toward the end of the movie, the youth
played by John Travolta has finally gotten up the nerve to leave
his provincial Brooklyn neighborhood to try his luck in near-butoh-so-far Manhattan. Travolta’s crossing the Brooklyn Bridge
is a poignant, pivotal moment in the film—a rite of passage.
Whereas the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge was the scene of the
immature, dangerous games of Travolta and his friends earlier
in the story, the Brooklyn Bridge—older, more substantial, and
leading to Manhattan rather than Staten Island—comes to represent the challenge of moving on, growing up. Quite clearly, at
least in the movies, this is not just another pretty bridge.
2. BROOKLYN

HEIGHTS

PROMENADE

The dramatic view of the Brooklyn Bridge, Lower Manhattan,
New York Harbor, and the Statue of Liberty that can be seen
from the Brooklyn Heights Promenade may well be NYC’s ultimate photo opportunity. Built in 1951 to protect Brooklyn
Heights residents from the sight and some of the sounds of the
Brooklyn-Queens Expressway, which runs beneath it, this paved
esplanade—with its trees, shrubs, and park benches—quickly became one of the most popular spots in the neighborhood for


@

BROOKLYN:

HOMETOWN

OF

THE

STARS

393

strollers, joggers, romantic couples ... and filmmakers. Indeed,
sometimes it seems as though directors deliberately house a major character in Brooklyn Heights just’so they can feature a scene
set on the promenade. A case in point: Three Days of the Condor, where, because Faye Dunaway happens to live in Brooklyn
Heights, Robert Redford (whom she happens to be hiding in her
apartment) is able to have a dramatic promenade confrontation
with bad-guy Cliff Robertson. Other features in recent years that
have also used the promenade to add to the drama—and often
the romance—of a scene or two are: Moonstruck (1987), She’s
Gotta Have It (1986), Prizzi’s Honor (1985), Luna (1979), Saturday Night Fever (1978), The Sentinel (1977), and Sweet November (1968). And let’s not forget the Patty Duke Show, which

was filmed in Manhattan, set in Brooklyn Heights, and showed
off the promenade during its opening credits for several primetime television seasons in the 1960s. In addition to its TV and
film appearances, the promenade is constantly used for print ads
and fashion photography.
3. PRIZZI’S

HONOR

3 Pierrepont

MANSION

Place

The late William Hickey, New York actor and acting teacher extraordinaire, was nominated for an Academy Award in 1986 for
his portrayal of the dying Mafia chieftain, Don Corrado, in John
Huston’s Prizzi’s Honor. In the film, the fabulous brick palazzo
with magnificent gardens that was Don Corrado’s home and
headquarters was actually a landmark Brooklyn Heights mansion built in 1857 for a wealthy local named Abiel Abbot Low.
Low’s son, Seth, went on to be mayor of Brooklyn, president of
Columbia College, and eventually mayor of New York, after
Brooklyn and the other boroughs were consolidated into the
City of New York in the 1890s. Little did Mr. Low know that his
handsome family home would one day be in the hands of the underworld.
Another Prizzi’s Honor location—standing just across the
street from the Pierrepont Place palazzo—is the apartment building at 57 Montague Street. It was here that Jack Nicholson had
that pad with the great view of the Brooklyn Bridge.


394

NEW

TYORK:

THES

MOeMVITEMIEO'V- EIR *S tGAu DE

Prizzi’s Honor Brooklyn

Heights mansion

4.

THE
10

SENTINEL
Montague

BUILDING
Terrace

It looks like an idyllic place to live, this beautiful Brooklyn
Heights brick building with its wrought-iron gate, lush front
garden, and elegant stained-glass entryway. But in the 1977
supernatural thriller The Sentinel, Cristina Raines found anything but peace and quiet when she rented an apartment here.
For, unbeknownst to her, she had entered the gates of hell, and
for the rest of the film she battled all manner of ghosts and
ghouls as neighbors. The real-estate agent who got Miss Raines
into this otherworldy mess was none other than the great MGM
beauty Ava Gardner (1922-1990), playing one of the many
cameo roles, along with a stint on the TV series Knots Landing,
that kept her more or less active for the last decades of her

career.


BROOKLYN:

HOMETOWN

OF

THE

STARS

395

Housing Projects in

Regina Taylor reads Pee Wee Love at Gowanus

Spike Lee’s Clockers, 1995
Se

a

5. GOWANUS
Hoyt

and

A

HOUSING
Wycoff

PROJECTS

Streets,

Boerum

Hill

Brooklyn-raised Spike Lee (his family moved here from Atlanta
when he was an infant) shoots as much as he can in his favorite
borough and his 1995 film version of Richard Price’s novel
Clockers was no exception. The Price novel, which tracked the
lives of round-the-clock drug runners (“Clockers”), was originally set in New Jersey and Martin Scorsese was to have directed it. But Scorsese, who opted to direct Casino instead,
wound up producing Clockers and giving it to Lee to direct.
Rather than venture across the Hudson, Lee stayed in familiar
territory and set the film in these basic Boerum Hill low-income
housing projects, which became the Nelson Mandela Houses in
the film. The projects’ green wide-open spaces—originally designed for the pleasure of the residents—provided the clockers
with an ideal locale for their complex, multistep drug-peddling
operations.


396

NEW

YORK:

THE

AMOVIEMEOV

ERAS

"GUIDE

Brooklyn Paramount, ca. 1930

6. PARAMOUNT
385

Flatbush

THEATER
Avenue

SITE
Extension

The sweeping marquee that once wrapped around Flatbush and
DeKalb Avenues is gone, as are the two nine-story-high neon signs
that told all of Brooklyn that this was the fabled Paramount
Theater. With 4,126 seats, the Brooklyn Paramount reigned as the
borough’s biggest movie palace from 1928—when it opened with
Nancy Carroll starring in Manhattan Cocktail—to 1962, when its
last picture show was Hatari with John Wayne. Designed by Rapp
and Rapp, the architectural firm responsible for the Paramount
Theater on Times Square, the Brooklyn Paramount was just as famous for its Paramount-Publix stage shows as for its films. Early in
the theater’s history, a chorus girl named Ginger Rogers leapt successfully from the Paramount stage-show circuit to Broadway and
eventually to the Paramount Studios in Astoria.
By the time the’ 1950s rolled around, the once-lavish stage
shows at the Paramount had given way to rock-and-roll extrav-


¢

BROOKLYN:

HOMETOWN

OF

THE

STARS

397

aganzas. By that time, too, Long Island University had acquired
the office building that towered over the Paramount, and in
1962, when the theater shut down permanently, LIU turned the
massive auditorium—with its mighty Wurlitzer organ and its
star-studded ceiling—into a gymnasium. It’s still that today.
7. DUMBO
Washington

and

Front

Streets

Among film people in New York City, DUMBO is not a famous
Walt Disney cartoon elephant but rather refers to Down Under
the Manhattan Bridge Overpass. When filmmakers want a glamorous, romantic background for a Brooklyn-set film, they head
to the Brooklyn Heights Promenade, but when they want a bit of
grime, grit, old warehouses and factory buildings along with a
spectacular riverfront view, they shoot at DUMBO. Often used
for commercials (one art director brought in tons of sand to turn
a DUMBO

street into a desert for a car advert) as well as TV

series like The Sopranos, Third Watch, and Law & Order, the

area has welcomed such features films as The Siege (1998), Stay
(2004), and The Forgotten (2004). Indeed, DUMBO had become

so inundated with film crews that some residents felt that things
were getting out of hand—what with overzealous production assistants trying to keep residents from entering their lofts and ruining a take, not to mention the guy who racked up over $400 in
parking tickets and towing charges because of covered parking
signs and unsympathetic NYPD towing crews. Because of all the
neighborhood discontent, in early 2004 DUMBO was put on a
“Hot List” by the Mayor’s Office of Film, Theater, and Broadcasting—the city agency that issues permits for location shoots.

Hot List status means that, for the moment at least, DUMBO is
off-limits to moviemakers—but not to movie lovers, who may

want to wander down there and see what all the fuss is about.
8. STEINER

STUDIOS

15 Washington

Avenue,

Brooklyn

Navy

Yard

The Brooklyn Navy Yard dates back to 1801, when the U.S. Navy
took over an already thriving Brooklyn port and turned it into a
military base, which served the country from the War of 1812


398

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

through the Civil War and the two world wars. It reached its high
point during World War II, when some seventy thousand people
worked here. In the midst of that war, Alfred Hitchcock used the

Brooklyn Navy Yard as an important location in his scary look at
Axis terrorists at work in the United States, Saboteur (1942); in

the film, the Fifth Columnists plan to blow up the USS Alaska in
the yard, but Robert Cummings saves the day. After the war, Hollywood returned to the navy yard when director Stanley Donen
used it as the point of embarkation for Frank Sinatra, Gene Kelly,
and Jules Munshin for their whirlwind musical adventure as
sailors on leave in New York in On the Town (1949).
Abandoned by the navy in the early 1970s, the yard has been
redeveloped as a 265-acre industrial park. For movie lovers, the
most exciting tenant here is Steiner Studios, a brand-new, builtfrom-the-ground-up film studio that debuted in 2004 with
170,000 square feet of soundstages plus postproduction facilities, a screening room, and the piéce de résistance—New York’s
only back lot, since most of the old navy yard’s historic buildings
are still standing, some dating back to Civil War times, and can
easily be adapted for background work.
Visit www.steinerstudios.com.

9. WILLIAMSBURG

BRIDGE

Its neighbor to the south, the Brooklyn Bridge, made history
when it opened in 1883. Not only was the Brooklyn Bridge an
architectural and engineering marvel, it was a thing of extraordinary beauty. On the other hand, the Williamsburg Bridge, when
it came along in 1903, was just another bridge—and not a very
pretty one at that, looking more “propped up” than suspended.
If it was noted for anything, it had the dubious distinction of
opening up the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn to the impoverished masses of the Lower East Side.
Over the years, unlike the glamorous and photogenic Brooklyn Bridge, the lowly Williamsburg span has inspired few filmmakers. Indeed, when it has been used cinematically, it has
usually been as a location for films that emphasize the gritty
downside of New York City’s mystique. A classic case in point is


¢

BROOKEY
Ne

HOMETOWN

OF

THE

STARS

399

si

Williamsburg
==

ee

Bridge as seen in The Naked City, 1948
ee

the 1979 film Last Exit to Brooklyn, which told of drugs, drag
queens, and abuse in 1950s Brooklyn and made extensive use of
the bridge’s pedestrian walkway. In 1950, another edgy film, The
Sleeping City, focused on drugs and murder at a major metropolitan hospital and starred Richard Conte as an undercover cop
posing as a doctor at the hospital. In the film, the park at the foot
of the Williamsburg Bridge furnishes the gloomy backdrop for a
number of secret meetings that Conte has throughout the film.
Perhaps The Sleeping City’s director, George Sherman, remembered the Williamsburg Bridge from the landmark New
York film noir two years earlier that also used it as a location—
Jules Dassin’s The Naked City. This time the Williamsburg
Bridge provides a cold, erector-set-like setting for a confrontation between the police and the killer at the end of the film. The
killer, needless to say, loses the battle, and winds up falling to his
death in the East River. More recently, in Sidney Lumet’s look at
corruption in the New York Police Department, Serpico (1974),
the Williamsburg Bridge again turns up. Here, when street-smart


400

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER“’S

GUIDE

Italian-American cop Frank Serpico (Al Pacino) leaves his Brooklyn home for a new life in a Greenwich Village apartment, he
drives into the city in a battered Dodge and takes the Williamsburg Bridge. Clearly the Brooklyn Bridge and even the Manhattan Bridge would have been much too glamorous for this
character, this car, this film.
Of the Williamsburg Bridge’s film appearances, its most dramatic may well have been in a 1914 silent called Fighting Death, in
which daredevil movie hero Rodman Law and a young actress
both jump from one of its parapets and parachute into the East
River. Both performers, it turns out, actually did the stunt, and
caused quite a bit of commotion among passersby and motorists
who thought that they were witnessing a double suicide. However,
as the New York Times reported in its February 6, 1914, edition,
“the shouts, shrieks and yells which greeted the double jump
stopped for a moment when it was seen that the two had parachuted .. . and as the two struck the water, the breathless crowd on
the bridge noticed a tug cruising near them with motion picture
cameras aboard.” Just another day of Manhattan moviemaking.
Recently the Williamsburg Bridge emerged from a major
makeover, since in the early 1990s, the dangerously deteriorating
century-old structure was found to bea real-life disaster film
waiting to happen.
10.

MAE

WEST

184

Franklin

BIRTHPLACE?
Street

One thing is certain, she was definitely from Brooklyn. Just
where in Brooklyn is another story. Indeed, Ridgewood, Bushwick, Flatbush, and Greenpoint have all claimed Mae West as
their own. Perhaps not wanting to disappoint any of her fellow
Brooklynites, Mae offers no help in her autobiography, Goodness Had Nothing to Do with It (Prentice Hall, 1959), where all
she has to say on the subject of her birthplace is: “I was born on
a respectable street in Brooklyn.” In addition to the question of
where, there is also the question of when. Mae claimed that she
came into the world in 1893—but there are those who have calculated the year to be more like 1887. And just who was her father? Mae’s stories had John Patrick West being everything from


BROOKLYN:

HOMETOWN

OF

THE

STARS

401

Brooklyn bombshell: Mae West
(SSS a

TE

SS SEE SSE

a prizefighter to a detective to a medical doctor. In reality, it
seems, Mr. West ran alivery stable in Brooklyn. Which brings us
back to where. This exotic Gothic “fortress” on Franklin Street
between Java and India streets in Greenpoint is frequently said
to be Mae’s birthplace.


402

NEW

YORK:

THEPMOY

IiEMEOV ERS "GU

DIE

Tracy Camilla Johns

and Tommy
Redmond

Hicks in

Fort Greene Park in
,

~

11. FORT
DeKalb

St.

GREENE
to

Edwards

Spike Lee’s She’s

§6Gotta Have It, 1986

PARK

Myrtle

Avenue/Washington

Park

to

Street

Spike Lee’s 1986 film She’s Gotta Have It, a politically not quite
correct, but very funny look at a beautiful African-American
woman with a very healthy libido, put the writer-director on the
movie map. For the film, Brooklynite Lee shot extensively in this
historic little park, originally laid out in 1860, south of the old
Brooklyn Navy Yard and east of Brooklyn Heights. Although not
on the East River, the park offers fine views of the waterfront
from its hilltop. For history buffs, a 150-foot column remembers
some twelve thousand American prisoners of war who died on
British ships anchored near the Navy Yard during the Revolutionary War. An underground crypt, not open to the public, holds
their remains.
Visit www.fortgreeneparkorg,


¢

BROOKLYN:

12.

HOMETOWN

PRATT

OF

THE

STARS

403

INSTITUTE

Between

DeKalb

Avenues/Classon

and

Willoughby

Avenue

to Hall

Street

The unlikely setting for a landmark in pornographic cinema was
the library of the Pratt Institute, a prestigious school of art, architecture, and engineering, which was founded in 1887. In the
infamous film Debbie Does Dallas (1978), the title character
(played by Bambi Woods), who dreams of becoming a Dallas
Cowboys cheerleader, uses the library stacks for things other
than scholarly research. At the time of the shoot, Pratt officials
thought they were making their premises available for a respectable film. In 2001, Debbie Does Dallas was turned into a
play, which was a hit at the New York Fringe Festival but which
didn’t fare so well when it opened off-Broadway a year later.
Visit www.pratt.edu.

13.

LENA
189

HORNE

HOUSE

Chauncey

Street

She made history in 1941 when she became the first black
woman to be signed to a long-term contract by a major Hollywood studio. Before that, African-American performers freelanced in Hollywood, picking up jobs as they came along at
whatever studio happened to be casting maids, butlers, bootblacks, etc., in the less-enlightened times and movies of the
1920s and 1930s. But Lena Horne changed all that with her
MGM contract—or so she had hoped. As it turned out, Lena
was usually featured on-screen as an exotic lead singer in a production number that could easily be cut from the film when it
played in the South.
Lena Horne was born in Brooklyn and spent the first seven
years of her life in her paternal grandparents’ three-story brownstone on Chauncey Street in the Bedford-Stuyvesant district. Because her parents separated not long after her birth, Lena spent
her formative years growing up under the strong influence of
her grandmother, Cora Calhoun Horne. A vigorous civil rights
activist and a stalwart member of the black bourgeoisie,


404

NEW

YORK?

THE

MOVIE

EO

EIR™S

GUINDIE

Cora Horne taught her granddaughter to be polite to the lessadvantaged white families that lived in the neighborhood,
but refused to allow her to play with any children—white or
black—whose behavior and language did not meet her high standards.
Lena’s life on Chauncey Street was filled with cultural opportunities. While Cora often took the child along to her many club
meetings, Lena’s grandfather exposed her to museums, theater,
and movies. Indeed, all that Lena missed were her parents. Occasionally she would be visited by her father, who had shunned
middle-class respectability for the freewheeling life of a Harlem
gambling man. Less often, her mother, who was a sometime ac-

tress and who didn’t get along with Grandmother Horne, would
arrange to see Lena away from Chauncey Street.
Lena’s life took an abrupt turn when she was seven years old
and her mother decided that it was time to have her daughter live
with her. Thus began a long period of instability that had Lena
moving all over the South and the Midwest. Sometimes she
would live with her mother; other times, when her mother was
pursuing her theatrical career, Lena would be put up with relatives or family friends. Eventually, when her mother realized that

Still standing: Lena Horne house (on left)

SS

ES


¢

BROOKLYN:

HOMETOWN

ee

OF

THE

STARS

405

4

Lena in Hollywood: Stormy Weather, 1943
ET
SS
a
ENT
IEOE

PO

ES EY

she couldn’t provide a proper home for her daughter, Lena, now
in her early teens, returned to the house on Chauncey Street.
Unfortunately, Lena’s grandparents died within three months
of each other a year or so after her return, and she was uprooted
once again. Lena’s next home was with a woman-friend of her
grandmother’s. As it turned out, the woman was avery kind lady
who encouraged Lena in dance and theater. A few years later, she
wound up auditioning for the chorus of the famous Harlem
night spot the Cotton Club. She got the job, and suddenly a
whole new life began.
Like her old life, however, show business would also involve
frequent uprootings and the same loneliness. In her autobiography, Lena (Doubleday, 1965), Miss Horne speaks movingly of
her lifelong affection for her grandparents’ Brooklyn brownstone: “The Brooklyn house was coming, I suppose, to symbolize normalcy and stability to me. I felt I belonged there and all
through my life—until my father finally sold it a few years ago—
the existence of that house, the knowledge that it was there, unchanged, was a comfort to me.”
Attention, Lena Horne: It’s still there.


406

NEW

14. CYPRESS

HILLS

833

Jamaica

YORK:

THE

MOMVIIE

LOVERS

GUIDE

CEMETERY

Avenue

One of the many cemeteries that are clustered along the border
between northern Brooklyn and southern Queens, Cypress Hills
is a vast hilly enclave of trees, flowering shrubs, and graves that
range from traditional headstones to architecturally exotic mausoleums to small stone slabs embossed with Chinese characters.
Toward the back of the property, near the Queens border, stands
a huge white-granite building with stained-glass windows and a
dramatic columned entryway. This is the Cypress Hills Abbey
mausoleum, and inside, off to the right, along aisle EE, movie
lovers will discover a whole wall of crypts that bear the name
West. At the bottom of the stack is John E. West, 1900-1964;
above him are John West, 1862-1935; Beverly West, 1898-1982;

Cypress Hills Abbey
Mausoleum,

housing

Mae West’s crypt


¢

BROOKLYN:

HOMETOWN

OF

THE

STARS

407

Matilda West, 1875-1930; and, at the very top, one of Brook-

lyn’s most illustrious native daughters, the legendary Mae West,
1893-1980. Reportedly, when Mae’ was first interred in the
abbey, she had been put in the number-three slot. Once her will
was read, however, it became quite clear that Mae would not settle for anything less than top billing, and Cypress Hills saw that
her wishes were carried out.
Besides Mae, Cypress Hills Abbey also houses the crypt of
comic character-actor Victor Moore (1876-1962), baseball great
Jackie Robinson (1919-1972), and prizefighter James J. (“Gentleman Jim”) Corbett (1866-1933). While best known for his boxing exploits, Corbett occupies a unique position in motion-picture
history because in 1894 he signed an exclusive deal with the Kinet-

oscope Exchange Company (the company that marketed Edison’s
Kinetoscope motion-picture viewing device) to appear in filmed
fight sequences only for that company. In so doing, Corbett was

the first performer to sign a motion-picture-star contract.
In 2003, it was discovered that the ashes of the famous AfricanAmerican performer and songwriter (“Memories of You”) James
Hubert “Eubie” Blake (1883-1983) were interred here in an unmarked grave. In February 2004, a proper marker was put in place
and the intersection where it is located renamed Eubie Blake Corner. Blake’s life was celebrated in the Broadway musical Eubie
(1978), which starred the late Gregory Hines as the great man.
For movie lovers who don’t go to the cemetery, they can catch
it in the last reel of Spider-Man (2002), as the location of the funeral of Tobey Maguire’s Aunt May (Rosemary Harris).
15.

BARBRA
457

STREISAND

Schenectady

BIRTHPLACE

Avenue

In the early 1940s, the Brooklyn phone directory listed Emmanuel Streisand as living in this six-story brick apartment
building not far from Kings County Hospital. Streisand was an
English teacher married to Diana Rosen, the daughter of a
Brooklyn cantor who also worked in the garment district. The
couple had a son, Sheldon, born in 1935, and a daughter, Barbara, who came into the world in 1942. Less than a year later,
Mr. Streisand died and Mrs. Streisand left Schenectady Avenue


NEW

408

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

and moved herself and her two kids into her parents’ home in
nearby Williamsburg.
16.

PROSPECT

PARK

One of Brooklyn’s greatest treasures, Prospect Park provides the
borough with 345 acres of streams and ponds, green lawns
and gardens. Designed by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert
Vaux—the same team responsible for Manhattan’s Central
Park—Prospect Park was completed in 1874, some twenty-four
years before the independent City of Brooklyn would become
part of the City of New York.
Movie lovers, especially, will be interested in the park’s
Celebrity Path, which wraps around an enchanting lake over by
the Japanese Garden. Brooklyn’s answer to Hollywood’s starstudded Walk of Fame sidewalk, the Celebrity Path honors the
talents of artists, performers, and athletes who were born or who
flourished in Brooklyn. Among the stars who are remembered
here with their names inscribed on stepping-stones around the
lake are F Murray Abraham, Joey Adams, Woody Allen, Lauren
Bacall, Gene Barry, Eubie Blake, Joe Bologna, Clara Bow, Mel
Brooks, Eddie Cantor, Betty Comden, Tony Danza, Dom DeLuise, Richard Dreyfuss, Harvey Fierstein, Vincent Gardenia,
George Gershwin, Jack Gilford, Jackie Gleason, Louis Gossett Jr.,
Elliott Gould, Buddy Hackett, Moss Hart, Susan Hayward, Rita
Hayworth, Gregory Hines, Celeste Holm, Lena Horne, Edward
Everett Horton, Harry Houdini, Anne Jackson, Lainie Kazan,
Danny Kaye, Harvey Keitel, Alan King, Carole King, Tony Lo
Bianco, Anne Meara, Arthur Miller, Mary Tyler Moore, Zero
Mostel, Rosie Perez, Martha Raye, Mickey Rooney, Jackie Robinson, Phil Silvers, Neil Simon, Jimmy Smits, Paul Sorvino, Barbara Stanwyck, Connie Stevens, Barbra Streisand, Gene Tierney,
Marisa Tomei, John Turturro, Brenda Vaccaro, Ben Vereen, Eli
Wallach, Mae West, and Shelley Winters.
Harder to find, but also a must for movie lovers visiting the
park, is the tiny, fenced-off Quaker cemetery at the center of the
property (best reached from the 16th Street and Prospect Park
Southwest entrance). A private burial ground that dates back to
1849 (some twenty-five years before Prospect Park was built),
this is a peaceful preserve of green hills, big trees, and ancient


BRO.OKEYING

JHOMETMOWING

©F

TWHESS

T AIRS

409

gravestones. One of the newer memorials, on the slope to the
right of the main gate (which is always locked), marks the grave
of Montgomery Clift, who was buried here in 1966. Although
Clift’s funeral was held at the Episcopal Church of St. James in
Manhattan, he rests in Prospect Park because his mother, Sunny

Clift, had become enamored of the Quaker religion in her later
years. Clift’s simple headstone, by the way, was designed by John
Benson, the same artist responsible for John FE. Kennedy’s at Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia.
Visit www.prospectpark.org.

17. SOPHIE’S
101

Rugby

CHOICE

HOUSE

Road

They painted this distinctive Queen Anne-style Victorian mansion shocking pink for the 1980s film based on William Styron’s
1970s novel about 1940s Brooklyn, Sophie’s Choice. As Yetta

Sophie’s Choice house, Flatbush
a

aS

TETE

Se


410

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Mary Pickford
house, Flatbush

Zimmerman’s Brooklyn boardinghouse, this “Pink Palace” was
where a young writer from the South named Stingo (Peter MacNicol) first lived in New York, and where he slowly discovered
the dark secrets of his fellow tenants Sophie (Meryl Streep) and
Nathan (Kevin Kline). The Pink Palace, actually a private house
on a magnificent residential block of Flatbush, was repainted
gray once the film crew had gotten all their shots.
18. MARY
1320

PICKFORD
Ditmas

HOUSE

Avenue

According to local legend, this handsome half-timbered Tudor
house was built for Mary Pickford by the executives of the
Flatbush-based Vitagraph Company so that their new star would
have a luxurious Brooklyn bungalow near the studios. The same
story goes on to say that Miss Pickford never moved into this
Brooklyn house because Vitagraph moved to Hollywood before
the place was finished.
To set the record somewhat straight, Vitagraph never moved to
Hollywood; it did set up studios there, but these were always in addition to its Brooklyn operations. Also, Miss Pickford was never a
Vitagraph artist, although in the spring of 1916 it looked as if she
might become one. Shopping around for a new studio at the time,
Miss Pickford was in serious negotiations with Vitagraph’s head,
Albert E. Smith, when a very minor incident—detailed in Terry
Ramsaye’s A Million and One Nights (Simon & Schuster, 1926)—


¢

BROOK
EY Ne sHOMETOWNG OE

WhHEsS

TAR:S

411

occurred to nix the whole proposition. It seems that during a final
meeting between Mary and Smith, there had been much small talk
about the new baby that had just been born to Smith and his wife.
When at the end of the meeting, Pickford and Vitagraph had still
not come to terms, Mary, fully expecting another meeting, kept
everything cordial by asking when she might see Smith’s new baby.
To this, Smith, more interested in contracts than in babies, an-

swered: “Just as soon as we get this business signed up and out of
the way.” Not appreciating Smith’s crass sense of priorities, the
ever-so-proper Miss Pickford came back with, “If that’s it, P’ll never
see the baby,” and kissed Vitagraph good-bye.
It wasn’t a bad move on Mary’s part, as it turned out, because
six weeks later she signed a new contract with the studio she had
just left, Adolph Zukor’s Famous Players. It was quite a contract

for 1916: Mary would get more than a million dollars over a twoyear period—plus an extra $300,000 when her pictures earned out.
In addition, her name was to be the only one featured in any advertisements for her films, and the type size of her name had to be
larger than the title of the movie. She would also receive her own
exclusive studio plus script, cast, and directorial approval. Needless
to say, Mary never moved to Ditmas Avenue in Flatbush.

Helen Morgan house, Flatbush
(co Se

A

ET


412

NEW

YiOIRIKK:

TWHERMOVIIESEOMEIRTS "GiUui DIE

Helen Morgan in
Applause, 1929

19.

HELEN
466

MORGAN

East

18th

HOUSE

Street

Ann Blyth starred in this singer’s tragic life story in the 1957
Warner Bros. film The Helen Morgan Story. The same year, Polly
Bergen won an Emmy portraying the same singer in the TV special also called The Helen Morgan Story. Born on a farm in Illinois in 1900, Helen Morgan became the 1920s’ most famous
torch singer, appearing both on the stage—often in the Ziegfeld
Follies—and in early talking pictures. Her greatest triumph on
screen was in Rouben Mamoulian’s 1929, made-in-Astoria musical Applause, in which she sang “What I Wouldn’t Do for That
Man.” Miss Morgan also appeared as Julie in two screen versions of Jerome Kern’s Show Boat, a 1929 part-talking production that now is lost, as well as the much more famous 1936
Universal extravaganza that also starred Irene Dunne, Allan
Jones, Paul Robeson, and Hattie McDaniel. In 1941, Helen
Morgan died of cirrhosis of the liver brought on by years of al-


¢

BROOKLYN:

HOMETOWN

OF

THE

STARS

413

coholism. In the 1920s and 1930s, she called this barny 1899
Flatbush Victorian house home.
20.

BUCKINGHAM
726

Ocean

COURT

Avenue

It’s all very Hollywood—the tapestry-brick facade, the bay windows and ornate iron grilles, the gabled and tiled roofs. Add a
few palm trees and it could almost be the set for a Raymond
Chandler murder mystery. Actually, back in 1913, when the exotic Buckingham Court apartments were built at 726 Ocean Avenue, fantasy played a rather major role in Flatbush life—what
with the Vitagraph studios churning out “eighty-seven miles of
film a year” down on Elm Street. In those days, many of Vitagraph’s actors, technicians, and executives lived in Flatbush, and
it seems that Buckingham Court was an extremely popular address with the Vitagraph crowd. Indeed, the building’s exotic architecture may well have been an attempt by developers to cater

A-list accommodations:
Buckingham

Court


414

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

to the theatrical tastes of the Flatbush film colony. Locals say
that Douglas Fairbanks, Mary Pickford, Fatty Arbuckle, and
Norma and Constance Talmadge all once lived at Buckingham
Court. In the cases of Pickford, Fairbanks, and Arbuckle, this
would seem highly unlikely, since none of them ever worked for
Vitagraph. On the other hand, it is quite possible that the Talmadge sisters did reside at Buckingham Court—along with their
forceful stage mother, Peg, and their other sister, Natalie, who
made some films in the 1910s but never became astar. Today the
building is popular with the many West Indian immigrants who
live in this section of Brooklyn.
21.

ERASMUS
911

HALL

Flatbush

HIGH

SCHOOL

Avenue

Founded in 1787, Erasmus Hall High School is the oldest secondary school in New York State, and the second oldest in the
United States. Among the many famous Brooklynites educated
within its hallowed halls are lyricist Betty Comden, record-

Erasmus Hall High School


*

BROOKLYN:

HOMETOWN

STREISAND,
Freshman
Club,

Chorus,

2-4.

Se

OF

THE

STARS

415

BARBARA
1,

2;

Choral
Class of 59 graduate

a

EEA Ee

RES RE

RR

a

company executive Clive Davis, chess star Bobby Fischer,
Oprah! editor-in-chief Amy Gross, interviewer Larry King, comedian Gabriel Kaplan, diva Beverly Sills, singer/actress
Stephanie Mills, novelist Mickey Spillane, and songwriter/performer Neil Diamond. And then there are the motion picture
folk: Jeff Chandler (Ira Grossel during his Erasmus days), Susan
Hayward (Edythe Marrener), Barbara Stanwyck (Ruby Stevens),
Barbra Streisand, Jane Cowl, Aline MacMahon, Eli Wallach, and

Norma and Constance Talmadge. Movie lovers may remember,
too, a famous fictional Erasmus student. Her name was Phoebe,

and in her brief appearance at the end of All About Eve (1950),
we find her coveting Broadway star Eve Harrington’s Sarah Siddons Award, as the Eve Harrington—Margo Channing cycle is
about to go round once again.
Today’s Erasmus Hall is a very different place from the time
when most of the people listed above were students there.


416

NEW

YORK:

THE

"MOVIE

EOVER*®S

“GUIDE

Reflecting the changes in the ethnic makeup of Flatbush, the student body is now largely black and Asian. The historic institution has changed in other ways as well, notably with its bold
plan to turn the campus intoa series of small high schools, each
with a different specialty. The first of these, STAR (Science, Technology, and Research) Academy at Erasmus Hall, debuted in
2003.
22.

ALBEMARLE

THEATER

973

Avenue

Flatbush

Just like the old Stanley Theater in Jersey City, Brooklyn’s 2,700seat Albemarle movie palace later served as a Kingdom Hall for
the Jehovah’s Witnesses. Among the renovations made to this
historic 1920 theater, with its French Empire facade and enormous lobby, has been the installation of a baptismal font in the
basement.
23.

LOEW’S
1049

KINGS

Flatbush

THEATER
Avenue

With two enormous lobbies, a 3,609-seat auditorium lavished
with sculpted columns, magnificent murals, velvet draperies, and
gilded ceilings, Loew’s Kings brought the splendors of the French
Renaissance to Flatbush Avenue. Designed by the Chicago firm
of Rapp and Rapp and decorated by Harold W. Rambusch of
New York, the Kings opened on September 7, 1929, with a
“part-talkie” called Evangeline, starring Dolores del Rio, who
showed up in person for the glamorous event. Also on the bill

was a stage show that featured the revue Frills and Fancies, Wesley Eddy and his Kings of Syncopation, plus the Chester Hale
Girls “direct from the Capitol Theater” (Loew’s famous first-run
house on Times Square). In addition to the luxuries the theater
provided its patrons, it treated its staff pretty well, too, offering
them such perks as a gym and basketball court in the basement.
Like many movie palaces, Loew’s Kings started losing its
luster—and its customers—during the 1960s. Nonetheless, the
place somehow managed to hang on until 1977, when it finally
went out of business. Since then, the theater has been frequently
in the local news, as various groups with different agendas try to


BROOKLYN:

HOMETOWN

OF

THE

STARS

417

i
iN
§
1
Hi

,

\t
H
i
+

Splendor on Flatbush Avenue: Loew’s Kings Theater

figure out what to do with the massive old palazzo. In 2000, it
looked as though a group headed by Magic Johnson was going
to turn it into a twelve-screen multiplex—but that never happened. There are now plans to turn the theater into a cultural
center for the area’s Caribbean community.
While waiting for that to happen, movie lovers can see the
theater in Jim Jarmusch’s taxi-driver odyssey Night on Earth
(1992) as well as in Barry Levinson’s gripping drama of teenage
revenge Sleepers (1996).
24.

SUSAN
3507

HAYWARD
Church

BIRTHPLACE

Avenue

The daughter of a transit worker, the woman whom the world
knew as Susan Hayward was born Edythe Marrener on June 30,
1918. This three-story brick apartment on a commercial block in
Flatbush was her first home. Hayward’s most famous screen
roles were as the alcoholic singer Lillian Roth in Pll Cry Tomorrow (1955) and as a B-girl who winds up on death row in I Want
to Live (1958), which won her an Academy Award. She died of
a brain tumor in 1975.


418

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

i
y
Z
enone

Brooklyn-born

Susan

Hayward arriving at
La Guardia, 1952

25.

BARBRA
3102

STREISAND

Newkirk

PROJECTS

Avenue

A great brick jungle of aging post-World War II apartment
houses rises between Newkirk and Foster, Nostrand and New
York Avenues, in the center of Flabush. Today these projects offer housing to low-income, mostly Afro-Caribbean families. Fifty
years ago these same buildings housed many of Flatbush’s once
large Jewish middle class. One family that resided here in the
early 1950s was that of Louis Kind, his wife, Diana, and their
child, Rosalind. Also sharing the Kind apartment were Diana’s
son and daughter from her first marriage, Sheldon and Barbara
Streisand. By all accounts, it was not an idyllic situation—especially for little Barbara, who had to contend with a stepfather
who is said to have referred to his baby daughter and his tenyear-old stepdaughter as Beauty and the Beast. At the same time,
it seems that Barbara referred to Mr. Kind as “a used car salesman or something,” when in reality he was a real-estate agent. In


BROOKLYN:

HOMETOWN

OF

THE

STARS

419

Barbra Streisand’s

childhood home,
Flatbush

any event, Kind didn’t last too long on Newkirk Avenue. He
moved out in 1953 and never came back.
Meanwhile, Barbara appears to have had a fairly uneventful
adolescence. She spent a lot of time watching television on a
neighbor’s seven-inch set; she also babysat, worked as a cashier
at a nearby Chinese restaurant, ushered at the Loew’s Kings
movie house on Flatbush Avenue, and attended Erasmus High
School, where she won a medal in Spanish, sang in the chorus,
and graduated in 1959 with a 93 percent average. After that, she
went to Manhattan because she wanted to become an actress. To
pay for acting lessons, she started singing in clubs . . . and, well,

we all know the rest.
26.

J. C. STUDIOS/VITAGRAPH
1268

East

14th

STUDIOS

SITE

Street

On the edge of Flatbush, this is one of New York’s most historic,
albeit least-known television studios. From 1984 to 1987, The
Cosby Show was taped here, and for a long time it was also
home to the soap opera Another World. Today, it hosts the venerable soap As the World Turns. The history of this facility—currently called J. C. Studios—goes way beyond television, however.
In 1903, a young and prosperous film company called Vitagraph
established its main studio here and on the adjacent property
now occupied by the Orthodox Jewish high school at 1277 East
14th Street. Today, with the exception of the studio’s modern


420

NIEIW

YOIRIKK?

TAESMOVIE

MOV BRYS (GW

Die

front-office structure, the rest of the compound—including all
the buildings of the Yeshiva next door—dates back to the Vitagraph era.
Vitagraph was a studio of famous firsts. In 1907, for example,
Vitagraph was the first motion-picture company to put an actress
under contract. Her name was Florence Turner, but to movie au-

diences of the day she was simply the Vitagraph Girl. Miss
Turner costarred with the screen’s first matinee idol, Maurice

Costello, who set an important precedent for the film industry by
refusing to help build sets or paint scenery, activities actors in
early films were often called upon by their producers to do.
The greatest star in Vitagraph’s firmament was Brooklyn’s
own Norma Talmadge. Norma was a teenager when she made
her first appearance before the Vitagraph cameras rather unexpectedly in 1910. On a visit to the studio with her mother,
Norma saw her idol, the aforementioned Florence Turner, and

rushed up to meet her. As it turned out, Miss Turner was shooting a scene—which Norma ruined. By 1913, Florence Turner
had left Vitagraph, and Norma Talmadge had taken over as
queen of the lot. Other famous Vitagraph players of the 1910s
were the heavyweight (three hundred pounds!) comic John
Bunny, whose career came to a sudden end when he suffered a

Vitagraph’s Brooklyn studios


BROLWOIKEY
Ne HOME

TOWINGOF

THES

TAIR'S

421

Vitagraph superstar:
Norma Talmadge

fatal heart attack in 1915, and Anita Stewart, who made head-

lines in 1917 when she signed on with an upstart producer
named Louis B. Mayer before her Vitagraph contract had run
out. Vitagraph sued, and won, in a landmark case that established for many years the power of producers over their stars.
Less well known during their Vitagraph days were Leon Trotsky,
the Russian revolutionary, and Rudolph Valentino, the superstar,
both of whom worked as $5-a-day extras at the Brooklyn studio
long before they became famous.
By the mid-1920s, Vitagraph, which now had studios in Hollywood as well as Brooklyn, was having serious financial difficulties. Unlike many of its competitors, the Vitagraph Company
had not developed its own chain of theaters, and ultimately it
had trouble booking its features into first-run houses. Thus,
when Warner Bros. offered to buy the studio from its cofounder,
Albert E. Smith, in 1925, Smith had no choice but to sell. After


422

NEW

"YiOIRIK?

THENMOWV IIE MEOW ER YS:(Gin DIE

the sale, Warners held on to the Flatbush facility, and modified it
for their new Vitaphone sound system. In addition to carrying
out a number of important Vitaphone experiments, Warners also
produced short subjects with New York talent at its Brooklyn
plant. By 1939, however, there was little actual filming going on
at the old Vitagraph lot, and Warners sold off much of the property (the part that’s now the Yeshiva) to Technicolor. Then, in
1952, NBC acquired the rest of the studio and equipped it for
color-television broadcasting. Among the famous early color
“Spectaculars” that came live from Brooklyn was the 1955 production of Peter Pan that starred Mary Martin. Today, the studio is privately owned, and television is still here. Granted,
things are a lot quieter than in the old days when Vitagraph had
twenty-nine directors and hundreds of actors working simultaneously, but the fact that this historic show-business site is still in
show business is good news. Viva Vitagraph!

Saturday Night Fever
house, Bay Ridge


s

BROOKLYN:

HOMETOWN

27. SATURDAY
221

79th

NIGHT

OF

THE

FEVER

STARS

423

HOUSE

Street

a

John Travolta took the country by storm in 1978 with his deadon portrayal of a callow/callous Brooklyn teenager named Tony
Manero in Robert Stigwood’s Saturday Night Fever. Based on a
1976 piece in New York magazine by writer Nick Cohn called
“The Tribal Rites of the New Saturday Night,” the film shot a
lot of scenes on location in Brooklyn. For the Manero family
abode, this Bay Ridge bungalow got the nod. In the film, as we
all remember, John Travolta/Tony Manero worked in a paint
store by day and was king of the disco floor at night. In between, he spent a lot of time at home on 79th Street blow-drying
his hair, posing in front of his bedroom mirror, and at the
dinner table (which was in the kitchen) coming out with some of

the foulest four-letter language ever to burst forth from the Dolbys.
28.

SPECTRUM
802 64th Street

(at

Eighth

Avenue)

In the 1970s this Bay Ridge boite was called Odyssey and had its
fifteen minutes of fame as the location for many of the disco
sequences in the 1977 film Saturday Night Fever. Today, with its
flashing dance floor, laser lighting effects, and pulsing music, it
is still in business as a gay dance club called Spectrum. Outside
the club, if you look up Eighth Avenue, you’ll see the towering
Verrazano-Narrows Bridge off in the distance. Connecting
Brooklyn with Staten Island, this dramatic span also played an
important role in Saturday Night Fever as the bridge where Travolta and his drunken Bay Ridge buddies climbed, clowned, and
tempted fate.
29.

CLARA
857

BOW

73rd

HOUSE

Street

She was the ultimate flapper and clinched her film fame in the
1927 Hollywood feature It, through which she became known
forever after as “the It Girl.” Whatever “it” was that Clara Bow


424

NEW

"YOIRK?:

THE

MOVIE

(LOVERS

GUIDE

had, it didn’t last long. A combination of nervous breakdowns
and sex scandals—including a story of how she had “entertained” the entire starting lineup of the University of Southern
California football team—quickly shook the flimsy foundations
of her film career. Then talking pictures came along and finished
her off entirely.
Born in Brooklyn in 1905, Miss Bow spent most of her adolescence on the second floor of this modest wood-frame house
which still stands across from McKinley Park in the Bay Ridge
section of the borough. Her father was a waiter and her mother,
plagued with the same emotional problems that would later
afflict her daughter, died while Clara was in her early teens. At
the age of sixteen, Clara managed to escape her dreary Bay Ridge
existence when she won a movie-magazine beauty contest. The
prize: a small role in a Hollywood film. On the West Coast, Paramount biggie B. P. Schulberg took a liking to the Brooklyn
teenager, and Clara’s brief fling with fame is often thought to
have been the result of her fling with Schulberg.

Bay Ridge beauty: “It” Girl Clara Bow
SS

SE


¢

BROOKLYN:

HOMETOWN

OF

THE

STARS

425

Today, the “It” thing is having a renaissance, with celebrities
like Gwyneth Paltrow being given iiber-It status by Vanity Fair
magazine and even international party’ boys like Fabian Basabe,
romantically linked with First Daughter Barbara Bush in 2004,
being labeled the new “It Kid” by the New York Observer. But
arguably the ultimate It Girls are the Hilton Sisters—Paris and
Nicky—who hark back to Clara Bow with their famous partying
and, in the case of Paris, infamous X-rated antics, e.g., her sex

video that got a lot of play on the Internet.
30.

BENSONHURST
Stillwell

ELEVATED

Avenue

to

New

RAILWAY
Utrecht

Avenue

In 1968, Peter Yates directed what was considered the definitive
car chase in the Steve McQueen thriller Bullitt. But three years
later director William Friedkin topped Yates with the chase at
the climax of The French Connection—and he did so without the
hills and valleys of San Francisco to add to the drama. Instead,
it happened right here in the unprepossessing Bensonhurst sec-

tion of Brooklyn under the shadows of the hulking Bensonhurst
Elevated Railway. It reportedly took Friedkin five weeks to shoot
the scene, which covered some thirty blocks from Bay 50th Street
Station at Stillwell Avenue to the 62nd Street Station at New
Utrecht Avenue.
31.

NEW

UTRECHT

Sixteenth

HIGH

Avenue

and

SCHOOL
79th

Street

Fans of vintage TV shows may recognize this Bensonhurst high
school from the credit roll of the 1970s hit series Welcome Back,
Kotter, which Brooklyn-born comic Gabriel Kaplan created and
starred in. Kaplan never attended New Utrecht High, however;
he was an Erasmus grad and is said to have based Kotter on his
Erasmus days. To further complicate matters, the name of the
school in the series was neither New Utrecht nor Erasmus, but

the created-for-television James Buchanan. Things were different
in the old days: New Utrecht got to use its own name when it
played a featured role in MGM’s 1947 It Happened in Brooklyn.
In the film, New Utrecht High is where returning World War Il


426

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

vet Frank Sinatra solves his postwar housing problem by moving
into the basement of the school. Sharing his pad is the school’s
janitor, Jimmy Durante. Welcome back, Frankie.
32. CONEY

ISLAND

In the days when newsreels informed America’s moviegoing public of what was happening in the country and the world, summers would always bring the standard newsreel puff piece telling
of record-breaking weekend crowds jockeying for a place in the
Coney Island sunshine. Accessible by public transportation, this
three-mile-long strip of Brooklyn beach was for many New
Yorkers the easiest and least expensive way to escape the horrors
of summer in the city. And in the days before air-conditioning,
New York summers were pretty horrendous.
Besides its beaches, Coney Island offered vast bathhouses
with sports facilities, a boardwalk, penny arcades, side shows, all
sorts of food stalls and cafés, and several totally self-contained
amusement parks. In its heyday, there was nowhere on earth
quite like Coney Island; it was the world’s biggest carnival.

Harold Lloyd at Coney Island in Speedy, 1928
SE

I

RE

TE


s

BROOK

EYING

IFLOMETOMWINE

©

WHESS

_

TAIR:S

427

Uptown Girls Dakota Fanning
and Brittany Murphy at Coney

Island, 2003

When the movies came along in the 1890s, Coney Island was
already well established as America’s capital of fun and fantasy.
Therefore it is not surprising that early filmmakers were attracted to this magical and infinitely photographable island. Indeed, in 1896, the year that movies were first projected onto
screens in front of an audience, one of the titles that the Edison
Manufacturing Company offered to its exhibitors was called Sea
Waves at Coney Island. That same year Edison also produced a
twenty-nine-second film called Shooting the Chutes, which documented a particularly thrilling Coney Island ride of the day.
More chilling than thrilling was Edison’s 1903 Coney Island
shocker The Electrocution of an Elephant, which captured on
film the execution of Topsy, an elephant employed to help build
Luna Park but who had killed three men, including a drunken
spectator who fed hera cigarette. (Supposedly this was not Edison’s first execution—he had been publicly killing, but not filming, dogs and cats with AC power to show that his company’s
DC power was more effective and less dangerous.)
On November 3, 1899, Coney Island was the site of an im-


428

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

portant event in the history of the American cinema—when the
American Mutoscope and Biograph Company filmed a prizefight
between two boxers named Jim Jeffries and Tom Sharkey. To
capture the event, which took place at night in the Coney Island
Athletic Club, Biograph suspended some four hundred lights
above the ring. This turned out to be the first time that a film had
been successfully made with artificial light. The fighters were not
too thrilled about their history-making bout, however, because
the heat from all the lamps was intolerable. Between rounds,
they had to be shielded by umbrellas and fanned by their seconds
in order to complete the match.
The famous Edison director Edwin S. Porter also helped make
film history at Coney Island. In 1903, his Rube and Mandy at
Coney Island starred two leading vaudeville comics in an amusing ten-minute-long romp around Coney. Not as significant as
some of his story films, Rube and Mandy is nonetheless a valuable, and wonderfully photographed, documentary on turn-ofthe-century life. More of a landmark is Porter’s 1904 Fighting
the Flames at Coney Island, which captured a mock fire at a resort hotel and took an important step in bringing staged spectacles to the screen. Also important is the director’s 1905 Coney
Island at Night. Just three minutes long, this beautiful little film
was a brilliant experiment in night photography.
More made-at—Coney Island film history: In 1908, the Kalem
film company used Manhattan Beach (adjacent to Coney Island)
to stage the chariot race for a very low-budget, highly condensed
version of Ben Hur. Since Kalem had not secured the screen rights
for the popular novel on which it had based its little film, the
company was sued by the estate of author Gen. Lew Wallace, and
wound up settling out of court for $25,000. From then on, screen
rights became a force to be reckoned with in the movie business.
Dissolve to 1912, and a film called Cohen at Coney Island,
produced by a newly formed company called Keystone, which
planned to specialize in comedies. Directing as well as acting in
the film was one of the new company’s founders, Mack Sennett.
Cohen at Coney Island, as it turns out, was the first in a long line
of Keystone comedies, some of which featured Sennett’s legendary Bathing Beauties frolicking in the Coney Island surf long
before they got their feet wet in the Pacific. Ironically, four years
after Sennett had used Coney Island for his first independent pic-


s

BROOK
EY

NESHOMETOWNGOF

ThE

YS TARS

429

ture, one of his company’s greatest stars, Roscoe “Fatty” Arbuckle, left Keystone to set up his own production company.
Among the first films Arbuckle directed and starred in for his

new company was Fatty at Coney Island!
The Coney Island movies went on and on. In 1925, Adolphe
Menjou took a hair-raising roller-coaster ride at Coney Island in
The King on Main Street. The innovative camera work for the sequence was that of James Wong Howe, who would become one
of the industry’s leading cinematographers, earning Academy
Awards for The Rose Tattoo (1955) and Hud (1963). In 1928,

when Harold Lloyd, the bespectacled comic who made most of
his films in Hollywood, came to New York to shoot Speedy, he
couldn’t pass up Coney Island as a location. In Speedy’s Coney
Island interlude, we see Lloyd and his girlfriend riding the air-

Alice Mann, Fatty

Arbuckle, and Buster
|

Keaton in Fatty at
Coney Island, 1917


430

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

planes of Luna Park and the famous mechanical racehorses of
Steeplechase Park (where, by the way, Cary Grant worked as a
stiltwalker). Today, both of these amusement parks are gone, but
film historians in the 1980s found a very good print of Lloyd’s
film—with Czech subtitles!—providing another rare glimpse of a
lost world.
In the 1930s the movies started to talk. This meant that increasingly they were made on soundstages or on back lots, where noise
could be carefully controlled. It also meant that almost all featurefilm production moved to Hollywood. Thus, when we see Claudette Colbert and Ray Milland riding the Cyclone in The Gilded Lily
(1935), it’s thanks to the wonders of rear projection; and when we
get Betty Grable, George Montgomery, Cesar Romero, and Phil Silvers starring in Coney Island in 1943, we also get a lot of the back
lot at Twentieth Century-Fox in Los Angeles.
By the end of the 1940s, however, things had started to
change again. Lighter, more sophisticated cameras and sound
equipment that had been developed during the war meant that
movies could come back outdoors again. Once this started happening, movies also started coming back to New York, and occasionally to Coney Island. In 1953, Morris Engel did The Little
Fugitive, a low-budget independent film about alittle boy who
mistakenly thinks he has killed his brother and who spends a day
at Coney Island trying to run away from his fear. The film was
shot entirely on location, and was one of the features that helped
to reestablish New York as a moviemaking town.
And then, of course, there’s Woody Allen, whose career is very
much in the tradition of pioneer New York directors like Morris
Engel—and who came to Coney Island in 1977 to shoot part of
Annie Hall. In the film, Alvy Singer’s childhood home is under
Coney Island’s famous Cyclone roller coaster. Despite the fact that
precious little of vintage Coney Island survives today, Allen found
his Cyclone as well as some antique bumper cars and successfully
managed to evoke the feeling of the place in the 1940s. And speaking of success, Annie Hall, shot entirely in New York, won the
Academy Award for the best film of 1977, as well as two additional Oscars for Woody’s script and direction. Once again, Coney
Island had playeda role in the saga of filmmaking in New York.
That saga has continued with Brooklyn by the sea featured


a

BROOKLYN:

HOMETOWN

OF

THE

STARS

431

in Little Odessa (1994), The Object of My Affection (1998), Pi
(1998), He Got Game (1998), Mickey Blue Eyes (1999), Requiem for a Dream (2000), Angels in America (2003), and Up-

town Girls (2003), in which the teacup ride takes on special
significance for both Brittany Murphy and her precocious eightyear-old charge (Dakota Fanning). Meanwhile, movie lovers who
visit the old Coney Island will find the place revitalized, the Cyclone and Wonder Wheel restored, Nathan’s doing land-office
business in perhaps the world’s most famous hot dogs, and taking a cue from Disneyland, daily fireworks displays.
Visit www.coneyisiand.com.

33.

REQUIEM
3152

FOR

Brighton

A DREAM
6th

APARTMENT

Street,

Brighton

Beach

Actress Ellen Burstyn received an Academy Award nomination
for her role as the lonely, pill- and junk-food/junk-TV-addicted
widow Sarah Goldfarb in Requiem for a Dream (2000), director

Darren Aronofsky’s freaky portrayal of an American nightmare
Na

TE

Jared Leto on Coney Island boardwalk in Requiem fora Dream, 2000
(Ee

SEES


432

NEW

"“YOIRK*

THE

IMOMIESEOMV

EIR@S 16, U1) BiE

in Brighton Beach, Brooklyn. Besides her own demons, Sarah has
a son (Jared Leto) hooked on street drugs. Shot entirely in
Brighton Beach and adjacent Coney Island, the film captures the
weird beauty (a jetty view of the enormous beach and dazzling
sea), but more often the loneliness (the deserted Cyclone roller
coaster in winter, looking like a great hulking dinosaur skeleton)
of these Brooklyn neighborhoods. Especially memorable in the
film is Sarah’s big brick boardwalk-facing apartment building,
where yentas with lawn chairs vie for prime places in the sun
out front. Proud of the twenty-five pounds she’s lost (thanks to
speed) in hopes of getting on a trash TV show, Sarah exclaims
to her son: “Did you see who had the best seat? I’m somebody
now, Harry.”
