
Harlem/Washington Heights:
Uptown Renaissance

For years Harlem was written off as a crime-ridden ghetto by
many white New Yorkers who had never experienced its grand
boulevards, handsome brownstones, hilly streets, and proud
spirit. Today, however, the whole city is looking at this fabled
African-American enclave with fresh eyes as it emerges as one of
the hottest neighborhoods in New York City—with a fresh influx
of black and white homesteaders as well as a burgeoning number of new restaurants, clubs, shops, theaters, and museums.
What’s going on in Harlem is being called a renaissance. For
old-timers, it is reminiscent of that glorious era in the 1920s and
1930s, when Harlem was the undisputed capital of AfricanAmerican culture in America. Known then as the Harlem Renaissance, this vital period in Harlem’s history was marked by music,
poetry, theater, and some of New York’s liveliest nightclubs and
speakeasies. It was a time, too, when most of the country’s
best-known African-American entertainers—Paul Robeson, Bill
“Bojangles” Robinson, Ethel Waters, Duke Ellington—lived in
Harlem, and since they all made significant contributions to

America’s film history, today their former homes and apartment
buildings are high on the list of Harlem must-sees for movie
lovers.


364

NEWYORK?

THE

MOVTE

TE OV
EERes “CU

DIE

Harlem and nearby Washington Heights also preserve some
of New York City’s most historic movie theaters, including one
built in 1913 that is considered to be the first movie palace in the
City of New York. Although it’s still packing people in, it’s no
longer showing movies; it’s now a Baptist church. Another
Harlem theater still going strong is the legendary Apollo, which
since the 1930s has hosted the biggest names in the entertainment world. Today it is a symbol of the grand old and the
dynamic new Harlem. In the words of the Harlem Chamber of
Commerce, “You haven’t done this town till you’ve done it
Uptown!”
1. P.S.

101

141

East

111th

Street

Based on the real story of an East Harlem music teacher who
tries to bring a serious music program to her neighborhood’s
budget-challenged schools, the 1999 film Music of the Heart
starred Meryl Streep as the crusading Roberta Guaspari-Tzavaras.
The main location used for the film was this East Harlem public
school. The Streep film, directed by Wes Craven, best known
for his Scream and Nightmare on Elm Street horror flicks, was
not the first to tell the teacher’s tale; it was also the basis for the
1995 documentary Small Wonders, which was nominated for an

Academy Award.
2. METROPOLITAN
1901

First

HOSPITAL

CENTER

Avenue

The Hospital’s hospital . .. Metropolitan was the principal location for the 1971 black comedy that fleshed out our worst fears
about the medical profession. Paddy Chayefsky won an Academy Award for his screenplay, and George C. Scott received an
Oscar nomination for his performance as a hospital honcho in
this made-in-Manhattan masterpiece. The Pope of Greenwich
Village (1984) and Donnie Brasco (1997) were two other New

York films that used Metropolitan Hospital as a location.
\


HARLEM/WASHINGTON

HEIGHTS

3. FIRST

BAPTIST

1212

CORINTHIAN
Adam

Clayton

Powell

365

CHURCH

Jr. Boulevard

Now a church, this exuberant tile-faced building with its facade
of columns and arches also marks a milestone in the history of
moviegoing in New York: When it made its debut as the Regent
Theater in 1913, this was the city’s very first deluxe theater built
expressly for the showing of motion pictures. Before that, movies
were presented either in narrow storefront nickelodeons or in
vaudeville theaters. The owners of the Regent, however, were
banking on the fact that audiences were ready for something
new—and better—and so, when the Regent opened, everything
in the house was designed to make the experience of going to the
movies a truly special event. The Regent featured its own eightpiece orchestra, a separate string trio, the city’s first movie-house
pipe organ, uniformed ushers, printed programs, and a special
screen with black borders that made the picture seem brighter
and clearer. Unfortunately, even all of these innovations did not
provide enough incentive to fill the new theater, especially since

RtLm
Lids ialel

aia

Regent Theater, 1948
(ae


366

NEW

YOIRK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVERS

GUIDE

it was all the way up on 116th Street and Seventh Avenue, where
the locals—who were mostly of German, Irish, and Jewish origin
at the time—still felt that their money went further at the neighborhood vaudeville houses, where they got a show and a movie.
Thus, two months after opening, the Regent was in big trouble.
To its rescue came a man named Samuel L. Rothapfel, who,

having had quite a bit of success managing a movie house in Milwaukee, was hired to fix the Regent. First off, Rothapfel moved
the projector from the balcony down to the orchestra floor,
which provided a sharper, brighter image on the screen. Next he
gave the screen its own special curtain to add drama to the film
presentation. Rothapfel’s most important innovation, however,
had to do with the music. While house orchestras often played
during the film portion of a vaudeville show, little attempt was
made by the conductor to have the music fit what was going on
up on the screen. Rothapfel changed all that by carefully choosing the music and programming it to match the action and mood
of the film. In doing this, he added a new dimension to the experience of seeing a film. He also turned around the fortunes of the
Regent—and the age of the movie palace had begun.
After his success with the Regent, Rothapfel moved downtown to the Strand, the Rialto, the Rivoli, and his ultimate triumph, the theater that bore his nickname: the Roxy. Whereas all
these other theaters have since been demolished, the historic
building where Roxy began his New York career in 1913 still
stands, reborn as a Baptist church. Hallelujah!
4. TOM’S
2880

RESTAURANT
Broadway

Seinfeld fans will instantly recognize this funky diner with the
neon sign at the corner of Broadway and 112th Street. It’s where
Jerry, Kramer, Elaine, and George hung out for eight TV seasons
from 1990 to 1998—despite the fact that this neighborhood
spot was some twenty-one blocks north of Jerry’s apartment

building at 129 West 81st Street. But there’s more to the story—
or rather the geography—because the exterior used for Jerry’s
Upper West Side apartment building was actually off Wilshire
Boulevard in downtown Los Angeles. Since Seinfeld was shot in


HARLEM/WASHINGTON

HEIGHTS

367

Seinfeld lucheonette: Tom’s Restaurant
Sa

Los Angeles, that made sense—as did having a movie-set version
of Tom’s Restaurant on the soundstage of the CBS Studio Center
in Studio City, where the show was filmed. Back in New York,
Tom’s boasts such Seinfeld memorabilia as a signed poster from
the cast and a portrait of Kramer.
Call 212-864-6137.

5. COLUMBIA
Broadway
123rd

UNIVERSITY
to

Morningside

Drive

from

112th

to

Streets

Barbra Streisand and Jeff Bridges taught English literature here

in The Mirror Has Two Faces (1996); Woody Allen’s field was
creative writing in Husbands and Wives (1992), whereas for
Julia Roberts, it was art history, and the campus stood in for

Wellesley College in the 1950s in Mona Lisa Smile (2003). Other
Columbia University star connections have been William Hurt,
who performed some very questionable experiments with human


‘

368

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVLE

LOWER? S'G UD E

Ivy League Manhattan: Columbia University

subjects in Altered States (1980), and Sigourney Weaver, who
did research in the University’s Biological Sciences Department
in Tadpole (2002), whereas Weaver’s buddies Bill Murray, Dan

Aykroyd, and Harold Ramis also did research here two decades
earlier—but lost their funding so they had to go into business for
themselves as Ghostbusters (1982). And it was on a field trip to
Columbia with his high school classmates from Queens that
Tobey Maguire got that fateful spider bite that turned him into
Spider-Man (2002).
These are but a few of the many films that have shot sequences at this New York City Ivy League institution, whose
main Morningside Heights campus encompasses many blocks
and dates back to the 1890s. Besides being a popular location for
filmmakers, Columbia has a well-respected film department in its
School of the Arts, which has turned out the likes of writer/director Daniel Algrant (Naked in New York, 1994), director Kimberly Peirce (Boys Don’t Cry, 1999, which won Hillary Swank a
Best Actress Oscar), writer/director Nicole Holofcener (Lovely
and Amazing, 2001), and screenwriters Sabrina Dhawan (Mon-


HARLEM/WASHINGTON

HEIGHTS

369

soon Wedding, 2001) and Simon Kinberg (Mr. and Mrs. Smith,
2005). Besides its famous and up-and-coming graduates, Columbia’s film school can boast a number of industry names who have
taught master classes here, with Milos Forman, David Mamet,
and Martin Scorsese heading the list.
Visit www.columbia.edu.

6. APOLLO

THEATER

253

125th

West

Street

One of America’s most important show-business shrines, the
Apollo has hosted practically every major black performing
artist of the twentieth century on its stage at some point during
its seventy-year-plus history. Bessie Smith, Billie Holiday, Duke
Ellington, Ella Fitzgerald, Louis Armstrong, Pearl Bailey, Aretha
Franklin, Ray Charles, James Brown, Dionne Warwick, the
Supremes, and the Jackson Five have all played the Apollo, and
the list could go on and on. It is said that when a teenaged Elvis
Presley came to New York for the first time, the one place he

*

THELONIOUS |
DINAH WASHIR

Denzel Washington as Malcolm X, outside the Apollo


%

370

NEW

“YOVR'KE

Shire

MeV

he

SOMMERtS=6 UHiDiE

wanted to see was the Apollo. A decade later, the same story
would be told of the Beatles on their first trip to America.
The building that houses the Apollo was built in 1913 as
Hurting and Seaman’s New Theater, which presented burlesque
and vaudeville to a Harlem that was then predominantly white.
Twenty years later Harlem was a very different community when
entrepreneur Frank Schiffman took over the theater and started
showcasing black entertainers on their home ground as well as
relying on black audiences to fill the Apollo’s seats. This was very
different from a number of other fashionable Harlem nightspots
(such as the famed Cotton Club), which featured black acts on

their stages but refused to allow locals in the audience.
Three years after the Apollo opened, a white reporter for the
New York World Telegram published the following account of a
firsthand visit to what many people at that time considered a
very exotic place:
The Apollo is a sort of uptown Met dedicated to furious jazz,
coffee-colored chorus girls and grinning, drawling comedians...the first stand and last jump-off for the large caravanserai of Harlem entertainers. . . . The theater stands behind a
gaudy neon sign on West 125th Street, between a haberdashery
and a leather-goods store. The sidewalk outside is a favored location for old men lugging sandwich signs and pitchmen unloading razor blades and patent medicines. You buy your ticket at a
sidewalk booth (from fifteen cents mornings toa fifty-cent top
Wednesday and Saturday nights) and enter through a narrow
lobby lined with bathroom tiles, glistening mirrors and photographs of such Harlem idols as Ethel Waters and Louis Armstrong, all affectionately inscribed to the Apollo. At the candy
counter you can buy chocolate bars and peanuts, but no gum.
That is to protect the seats. In the lobby, three or four colored
boys generally are waiting for their dates to show up.

Whereas Harlem’s whites-only clubs eventually moved downtown (the Cotton Club relocated to Broadway and 48th Street
in the late 1930s) or closed down, the Apollo continued to flourish through the 1960s. By the 1970s, however, when America’s
color barriers and Complexes had been somewhat broken down


HARLEM/WASHINGTON

HEIGHTS

371

through the civil rights movement, and when many black entertainers found that they could make better money in the mainstream, the Apollo fell upon hard times. During this period, it
can be seen in the opening frames of the 1973 film Across 110th
Street, when a Cadillac loaded with black mobsters and Italian

mafia pass the theater, where the Miracles and Junior Walker and
the All Stars are appearing at the time. Despite its brush with the
movies, by 1976 the theater, no longer able to book top talent
and no longer able to fill seats, closed down.
In today’s hot new Harlem, however, that is no longer the case.
Refurbished and reopened in the 1980s and refurbished yet again
in 2002, the Apollo is one of the city’s most exciting venues, hosting big-name acts like Patti LaBelle, Vanessa Williams, and B. B.
King; big-time filmmakers like Spike Lee, who shot scenes for
Malcolm X (1992) here; Broadway-style musicals; TV specials;
the syndicated TV show Showtime at the Apollo; and the famous
Amateur Night, currently every Wednesday at 7:30 p.m.
For information on what's on at the Apollo as well as on guided
tours and tickets for Showtime at the Apollo, ca// 272-531-5301 or

visit www.apollotheatercom.

7. OSCAR
200

MICHEAUX

West

125th

FILM

CORPORATION

SITE

Street

An electronics store now marks the spot where one of the country’s
most prolific and ingenious independent filmmakers of the 1920s
and 1930s once had his headquarters. Unknown to most white
and many African Americans, Oscar Micheaux was a black man
from the Midwest who came to Harlem in the early 1920s and specialized in producing “race films.” These featured all-black casts
playing the roles—handsome heroes, glamorous heroines, villainous gangsters—that they were denied in mainstream movies at the
time. Literally a one-man film industry, Micheaux wrote, directed,
produced, and promoted the majority of his pictures and was successful in getting them distributed not only in Europe but also in the

U.S. South, where he convinced many white theater owners of the
profits to be made from setting up special matinee showings of his
features for African-American audiences.


S72

NEW

YORK:

THE

MON

TEIEOMER{SiG UN BiE

With a few exceptions, Micheaux’s movies rarely dealt with the
important social and economic issues that confronted his race. Instead, he produced highly commercial! black versions of the same
formula stories that spelled success for Hollywood. Typical
Micheaux titles were Daughter of the Congo, a 1930 swashbuckler that had a dashing black cavalry officer rescuing a wealthy Negro girl lost in the wilds of Africa, and Underworld (1936), a
standard 1930s gangster yarn in which both the good guys and the
bad guys were black. Even Micheaux’s stars were marketed with
Hollywood counterparts in mind: suave Lorenzo Tucker, for example, was the Black Valentino, sultry Ethel Moses was the Negro
Harlow, sexy Bee Freeman was the Sepia Mae West, and Slick
Chester, who often played gangsters, was the Colored Cagney.
These stars, by the way, were usually light-skinned, and Micheaux
is sometimes criticized today for the unreal black world that his
films created. But this criticism is offset by films like The Exile
(1931), which dealt with the sensitive issue of a black man who
falls in love with a woman he thinks is white, and God’s Stepchildren (1937), which focused on the perils of trying to pass for white

A scene from Oscar Micheaux’s Underworld, 1936
SS

a

a

ETS


HARLEM/WASHINGTON

HEIGHTS

S75

The building that

housed the
headquarters of Oscar

Micheaux Film
Corporation

in a racist society. Ultimately, Micheaux was not a philosopher but
a filmmaker, and his films provided black audiences of the 1920s
and 1930s with positive self-images at a time when the major studios systematically kept people of color in their place on-screen by
casting them as maids, mammies, butlers, and shoeshine boys.
8. LENOX
288

LOUNGE

Lenox

Avenue

A legendary Harlem jazz club, the Lenox Lounge debuted in
1939 and over the years has welcomed greats like Billie Holiday,
Miles Davis, and John Coltrane to its Zebra Room performance
space. Restored to its original Art Deco splendor in 1999, the

Lenox Lounge is a major player on the contemporary Harlem
nightlife front. A hangout for Malcom X in the 1950s and
1960s, the Lenox was used as a location for Spike Lee’s 1992
chronicle of the controversial African-American leader’s short


*

374

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Harlem hot spot: Lenox Lounge

life. The club also turned up in the 2000 version of Shaft, based

on the 1972 film of the same name, directed by Gordon Parks
and one of the first mainstream movies to star an African American (Richard Roundtree) as a private detective. While the original Shaft spawned the popular blaxploitation genre of the 1970s,
the 2000 film, directed and coscripted by John Singleton, is a
much more sophisticated piece; Shaft (Samuel L. Jackson), now
a former police officer, deals not only with fighting crime but
with the social and racial issues involved in that struggle.
For reservations at the Lenox Lounge, call 212-427-0253 or visit
www.lenoxlounge.com.

9. FILMWAYS
Second

SITE

Avenue

and

127th

Street

Though now avast parking lot, a barn of a building once stood
on the southwest corner of 127th Street and Second Avenue and
reigned for two decades as one of New York City’s most active
movie studios. Among the many features that were done at
Filmways (which had been a city transit garage before it was


HARLEM/WASHINGTON

HEIGHTS

375

made a studio) during the 1960s and 1970s were Murder Incorporated (1960), Splendor in the Grass (1961), The Brotherhood
(1968), Klute (1971), The Godfather (1972), The Taking of Pelham One Two Three (1973), Annie Hall (1977), and Manhattan
(1979). Filmways also saw a number of TV series lensed on its
soundstages, the most famous of these being The Defenders, The
Nurses, and The Blue Men. When the studio closed in the early

1980s, one of the reasons was supposedly because the neighborhood had become too dangerous. Fortunately, by then the city
had a number of new production facilities such as the reborn
Astoria Studios to fill the void caused by Filmways’ demise.
Across the street from the Filmways building, another famous
movie studio once stood. Also a conversion, Cosmopolitan Studios
was created in 1918 out of a former nightclub on the east side of
Second Avenue at 127th Street. The man behind the makeover was
William Randolph Hearst, who at the time was obsessed with turning his showgirl protégée Marion Davies into a movie star. In typical Hearstian fashion, the famous newspaper man/movie mogul
spared no expense in order to make Cosmopolitan one of the top
studios in town. His ultimate extravagance was the special fivepiece string orchestra that he hired to play popular melodies in or-

William Randolph

Hearst’s Cosmopolitian Studios


376

NEW

YORK:

TAME

MOVIE

DONIER
=St GUIDE

der to keep Miss Davies in a pleasant frame of mind between takes.
The group was nicknamed the Marion Davies Orchestra, and Marion is said to have used them throughout her career.
10.

THE

COTTON

656

West

CLUB

125th

Street

The inspiration for Francis Ford Coppola’s 1984 film The Cotton
Club, the real thing opened at 142nd Street and Lenox Avenue in
1923 and was considered a white sanctuary, meaning it featured
black entertainers but refused to allow African Americans in the
audience. Supposedly even the great composer W. C. Handy was
not allowed in, despite the fact that his music was emanating
from inside. Known for its light-skinned, “Tall, Tan, and Terrific”
chorus girls and its orchestras led by Duke Ellington and Cab
Calloway, the Cotton Club held forth on 142nd Street until the
Depression, which devastated Harlem. The club hoped for better
business down on West 48th Street in the slightly more cheerful
Times Square area, but this was a short-lived venture. The current
Cotton Club, housed in a cool little Deco building beneath the
West Side Highway, is another story. Opened in 1978, when the
new Harlem was just starting to emerge, it is still going strong, although it is better known these days for its weekend gospel
brunches than for its big-name entertainers.
For reservations, call 212-663-7980 or visit www.cottonclub-

newyork.com.

( Cie)

The current
Cotton Club


HARLEM/WASHINGTON

HEIGHTS

S77

The Royal
Tenenbaums’

Harlem home

11. TENENBAUM
339

Convent

MANSION
Avenue

In the film The Royal Tenenbaums (2001), the overachieving yet
dysfunctional Tenenbaum family—matriarch Anjelica Huston,
kids Gwyneth Paltrow, Luke Wilson, and Ben Stiller—supposedly
lived on Archer Avenue in the Bronx at an address which doesn’t
exist. The very real Victorian mansion used for the picture, however, is this distinctive turreted number in the historic Hamilton
Heights section of Harlem. The film’s director, Wes Anderson,
who used to draw fantasy mansions when he was growing up in
Texas, knew the kind of house he wanted for the film and finally
found it in Harlem. At the time the place appeared to be abandoned and needed a major redo, but it turned out that a new
owner was just about to renovate the property. Anderson and an
undisclosed sum of money from his Disney backers were able to
convince the owner to put off his renovations and rent the house
to The Royal Tenenbaums for six months. In addition to having
the storybook quality that Anderson wanted for his film, the location had the additional advantage of being situated on a corner,
which made it a cinematographer’s dream, since corner buildings
are much easier to shoot.


378

12.

NEW

ETHEL

WATERS

580

Nicholas

St.

YORK

GPAHE

MOVIE

VOMER<S) iGiUTDiE

RESIDENCE
Avenue

Throughout most of the 1920s and on into the 1930s, Harlem not
only presented a place for African Americans to find decent housing in a country that usually denied it to them, it also promised intellectual stimulation and creative fulfillment. Popularly known as
the Harlem Renaissance, the flourishing of African-American culture that took place in Harlem in the 1920s and 1930s was marked
by large numbers of talented writers, poets, artists, and performers
flocking to Upper Manhattan. One of the major centers of the
Harlem Renaissance was a posh apartment house at 580 St.
Nicholas Avenue in the fashionable Sugar Hill district. Known simply as “Five eighty” to the in-crowd, the building boasted many
celebrity tenants during its heyday, but none more famous than
Ethel Waters, considered the first black woman to win star billing
both on the stage and in the movies. Of her films, Cabin in the Sky
(1943), Stage Door Canteen (1943), Pinky (1949), and The Mem-

ber of the Wedding (1952) are the most memorable. Miss Waters
was alsoa star of early television, playing the title role in the Beulah series during its first two seasons, from 1950 to 1952.
13.

STRIVER’S

ROW

West

and

139th

Streets

Seventh

and

Eighth

138th

between

Avenues

Built in 1891, these smart tree-shaded row houses were among
then-white Harlem’s most desirable addresses. When the whites
moved away in the early twentieth century and African Americans started settling in the area, these same houses now attracted
some of the community’s most successful and affluent black residents. Hence, the nickname Striver’s Row. Among them were
the composers W. C. Handy and Eubie Blake, and theater entrepreneur Noble Sissle. When Spike Lee made his provocative film
Jungle Fever (1991), which dealt with an interracial love affair
between a middle-class African-American man (Wesley Snipes)
and an Italian-American secretary (Annabella Sciorra) from
Brooklyn, he had Snipes living in a Striver’s Row flat.


HARLEM/WASHINGTON

14.

DUNBAR
2588

HEIGHTS

S79

APARTMENTS

Adam

Clayton

Powel]

Jr.

Boulevard

This cluster of six six-story walk-up apartment buildings between
West 149th and 150th streets was built in the late 1920s by John D.
Rockefeller as the country’s first large cooperative-apartment complex for blacks. Named for the African-American poet Paul Laurence Dunbar (1872-1906), the Dunbar offered courtyards and
gardens, published its own gossipy newsletter, and housed some of
Harlem’s toniest citizens. Among those who enjoyed Dunbar luxuries were the dynamic NAACP leader W. E. B. DuBois, poet Countee Cullen, newspaperman Asa Philip Randolph, and explorer
Matt Henson, who was part of Admiral Perry’s North Pole expedition and the first Westerner to set foot at the Pole.
The world of show business was represented at the Dunbar by
the famed leading man and operatic basso Paul Robeson, stage
and movie character actor Leigh Whipper, violinist-composer
Clarence Cameron White, and the illustrious musical performer

Harlem star Bill
“Bojangles” Robinson
with Shirley Temple in

The Little Colonel, 1935


NEW

380

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Bill “Bojangles” Robinson, who sang and tap-danced in many
major films throughout the 1930s and is especially remembered
for his screen appearances with Shirley Temple. In addition to
performing with the child star in The Little Colonel (1935), The
Littlest Rebel (1935), Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm (1938), and
Just Around the Corner (1939), Robinson also choreographed
Temple’s 1936 film Dimples. In 1943, Twentieth Century—Fox’s
all-black film, Stormy Weather, not only starred Robinson but
was based loosely on his career in show business.
Today the Dunbar Apartments, after having fallen into disrepair during the 1960s and 1970s, have been renovated and are
now playing a role in the current second Harlem Renaissance.
15. AUDUBON
3940

BALLROOM

SITE

Broadway

The Audubon Ballroom was an important social and political center for Harlem from the 1930s to the 1960s. Housed on the second
floor of a historic Fox theater that opened in 1912, the ballroom
was famous for its Mardi Gras Festival, a highlight of the Harlem
social calendar, where a King and Queen of Harlem were crowned
every year. Important labor union meetings and political rallies
were held here as well. At one of these, a rally of the Organization
of Afro-American Unity, which took place on February 21, 1965,
Black Muslim leader Malcolm X was assassinated. After that incident, the ballroom was closed down, despite protests by the community. When Spike Lee made his film Malcolm X in 1991, he used
this exact location, which at the time still stood abandoned. Another film to feature the abandoned Audubon Ballroom was Susan
Seidelman’s ode to Downtown Manhattan, Desperately Seeking
Susan (1985), in which designer Santo Loquasto turned it into

the film’s fictional Magic Club, where bored suburban housewife
Rosanna Arquette gets a job as a magician’s assistant.
Today, again pointing to Harlem’s impressive comeback, the
famous ballroom has been refurbished, and the site has been
redesigned as a mixed-use complex—anchored by the biomedi-

cal research facility of New York—Presbyterian Medical Center,
which now owns it—with shops, restaurants, the HarlemHeights Historical Society, and the home of the new Malcolm X


HARLEM/WASHINGTON

The Audubon

HEIGHTS

381

Ballroom, 2004

SR
aT
EE
SS
TO

NS

Memorial Museum. There is currently a life-size statue of the
great leader in the Broadway lobby of the building. Also incorporated in the site is the historic terra-cotta facade of the original
Fox theater.
For Malcolm X museum

information,

visit www.themalcolmx

museum.org.

16.

DUKE
935

ELLINGTON
St.

Nicholas

RESIDENCE
Avenue

A plaque at the entrance to this Harlem Gothic apartment building indicates that it has been declared a National Historic Landmark because Edward Kennedy “Duke” Ellington once lived
here. Ellington resided in apartment 4A of the building from
1939 to 1961, and for much of the time his lady friend Beatrice
Ellis lived there too. More often known as Evie Ellington, even
though Ms. Ellis was never officially married to the Duke, she
was still with him when they moved downtown to West End
Avenue in the early 1960s. By that time, however, they saw little


382

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

of each other, since Duke was constantly on the road and Evie
had become reclusive in her later years.
Although known principally as a musician, composer, and band
leader, Ellington was connected with motion pictures throughout
his career, As a performer, Duke and his band appeared in a number of films in the 1930s and 1940s, including Murder at the Vanities (1934), with Mae West in Belle of the Nineties (1934), and
Cabin in the Sky (1943). In addition, Ellington wrote music for
the Marx Brothers’ A Day at the Races (1936), and did complete
scores for Anatomy of a Murder (1959), Paris Blues (1960), Assault on a Queen (1964), and Change of Mind (1968). His Paris

Blues score received an Academy Award nomination. Of Ellington,
Orson Welles is reported to have said that, next to himself, Duke
was the only genius he had ever known.
Ellington died of lung cancer in 1974 and was buried at
Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx, beside his parents. When his
life partner Evie died (also of lung cancer) two years later, she
was laid to rest in the same plot. The site of Duke and Evie’s
Harlem apartment—where they shared their happiest years together—was given landmark status that same year.

Duke Ellington residence


HARLEM/WASHINGTON

HEIGHTS

383

Going Hollywood: Duke Ellington and orchestra arrive in L.A. to shoot
Belle of the Nineties at Paramount with Mae West

17.

PAUL
16

ROBESON

Jumel

HOUSE

Terrace

One of Harlem’s many lovely surprises, Jumel Terrace preserves
a clutch of handsome townhouses on a small cobbled street.
Tourists come here mainly to visit the historic Morris-Jumel
Mansion, a columned Georgian residence dating back to 1765,
which sits on a grassy hill on the east side of Jumel Terrace. Movie
lovers will be more interested in the townhouse at number 16,
however, because it was the last Harlem home of the great
African-American actor Paul Robeson. In addition to his stage
triumphs—notably in Shakespeare’s Othello and in Eugene
O’Neill’s All God’s Chillun Got Wings and The Emperor Jones—
Robeson will always be remembered for his screen performances
in'The Emperor Jones (1933) and as Joe in Universal’s 1936 film
version of Show Boat, in which he sings “Ol’ Man River.”
Robeson is also remembered for ‘his leftist political views,
which got him into no end of trouble with the infamous Mc-


384

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Paul Robeson
residence

(second from left)
on Jumel Terrace

Carthy committee and the U.S. State Department in the late
1940s and well into the 1950s. Through it all, Robeson remained true to his country—even when the State Department revoked his passport in 1950 and refused to allow him to travel

King of Harlem:
Paul Robeson

in

The Emperor Jones, 1933


HARLEM/WASHINGTON

HEIGHTS

385

out of the United States. When he finally got his passport back
eight years later, he went on to spend several years in Europe and
the USSR. He returned to the United States in the early 1960s
and moved into 16 Jumel Terrace, where he lived as a virtual recluse until failing health forced him to take up residence with a
sister in Philadelphia. He died there in 1976.
From 1939 to 1941, Robeson lived not far from Jumel Terrace at 555 Edgecombe Avenue. One of Harlem’s grandest apartment buildings, 555 Edgecombe Avenue has been declared the
Robeson Home National Historic Landmark.
18.

UNITED

CHURCH

Broadway

and

175th

Street

This spectacular neo-Assyrian fortress at the northeast corner of
Broadway and 175th Street was called “the apogee of the movie
palace” when it debuted on February 22, 1930, as Loew’s 175th
Street Theater. Designed by Thomas W. Lamb, the 175th Street
featured an interior that looked like a great gaudy Hindu temple.

Reverend Ike’s United Church, formerly Loew’s 175th Street Theater
|Ee

SE

A Se

Se)


386

NIEW

YOR'KE

THE

MOVIE

CLOME RS

GUIDE

Inside Loew’s 175th Street
SSS

eS

ee

ee ee

Se

ee

ee

One of Loew’s five Wonder theaters (so called because each had
a huge Robert Morton Wonder organ), the 175th Street joined

the Paradise in the Bronx, the Kings in Brooklyn, the Valencia in
Queens, and the Jersey across the Hudson in Jersey City as the
final jewel in the crown formed by Loew’s most sumptuous New
York metropolitan-area movie palaces. Today the Wonder organ
is still going strong on 175th Street—not as part of any film presentation, but to back up the religious services. For many years,
the church’s star preacher was the controversial minister and
radio personality known as Reverend Ike.
19. THE

CLOISTERS/FORT

Margaret

Corbin

Road,

TRYON

PARK

off

Washington

Ft.

Avenue

A hilly green enclave above the Hudson River at the far northern
end of Manhattan Island, Fort Tryon Park encompasses sixtytwo acres that were formerly part of an estate that belonged
to the financier John D. Rockefeller. The highlights of the park
are its gardens—laid out by Frederick Law Olmsted of Central


HARLEM/WASHINGTON

HEIGHTS

387

Park fame—and the Cloisters. The latter is a cluster of sections
of French and Spanish medieval buildings that were imported
and creatively reassembled here in the 1930s. An annex to the
Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Cloisters display the museum’s
extensive collection of medieval tapestries, paintings, sculptures,
and architectural antiques. With their authentic medieval look,
the Cloisters would undoubtedly have been used by early East
Coast filmmakers as background for the swashbuckling and historical epics that were produced in Fort Lee, New Jersey, at the
beginning of the last century. But by the time the Cloisters were
erected, that kind of filmmaking was being done only on the
back lots of Hollywood.
Still, the Cloisters have provided an atmospheric location for
a number of films. One of the earliest of these was David O.
Selznick’s Portrait of Jennie (1948), where they are used to represent the convent that the mysterious title character played by
Jennifer Jones winds up in at the end of the film. Perhaps the film
that has used the site most extensively was Al Pacino’s Looking

Al Pacino and company take on Shakespeare at the Cloisters in Looking
for Richard, 1996
(aS

A

ET


388

NEW

Natascha

-YOIRSK

SdH SMIOiY IES AOIMAE
IR VStG WU DHE

McElhone and Brad Pitt share a romantic moment

at the

Cloisters in The Devil’s Own, 1997
RS

SE

a

a

EEET

ESSE

TET TS

STE S

for Richard (1996), which documented a group of actors (Pacino, Kevin Spacey, Estelle Parsons, Alec Baldwin, and Winona
Ryder among them) workshopping Shakespeare’s Richard III.
The film starts in a rehearsal studio but as the actors become increasingly involved in their roles, Pacino takes them to far more
Shakespearean surroundings: the Cloisters. Movie lovers may
also remember the Cloisters and Fort Tryon Park from Coogan’s
Bluff (1968), as the setting for a love scene between Clint Eastwood and Susan Clark as well as for the film’s final motorcycle
chase. More recently, The Devil’s Own (1997) used the Cloisters
for a dramatic rendezvous between IRA operatives Brad Pitt and
Natascha McElhone; as their New York caper is falling apart,
their attraction for each other is intensifying.
Visit www.metmuseum.org,.
