
SoHo/TriBeCa/ NoLita:
The “New” New York

In the 1980s, New York movies discovered Downtown Manhattan. Classic examples of the Downtown genre were Desperately
Seeking Susan and After Hours, which showed us a Manhattan
of New Wave nightclubs, Art Deco diners, trendy art galleries,
and lofty living arrangements—all decidedly below Houston
Street and with stars rarely over thirty. Edgy in the 1980s, the
Downtown communities of SoHo (South of Houston Street),
TriBeCa (the Triangle Below Canal Street), and NoLita (North of
Little Italy) have become increasingly mainstream. That hasn’t
stopped their film careers, however, as they’ve become virtually
a standard feature in even Uptown New York movies, which often have a scene or two set in a SoHo gallery, the latest NoLita
restaurant, or a TriBeCa loft.

For movie lovers of all geographical persuasions, Downtown
is a dream of location-spotting—from the scene of Meg Ryan’s
famous orgasm in When Harry Met Sally to the bar where the
Sex and the City set sipped Cosmopolitans. Besides locations,

the
Downtown now even boasts its own film festival, thanks to
efforts of local hero Robert De Niro, whose Tribeca Film Center

is yet another symbol of the area’s vital connection to New York
filmmaking.


280

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

WOVER Ss (GUDiE

Downtown

girls:

Rosanna Arquette

and Madonna in
Desperately Seeking

Susan, 1985

1. FILM
209

FORUM
West

Houston

Street

Set on a busy block of Houston Street, usually clogged with
trucks en route to the nearby Holland Tunnel, this little movie
house reigns as the city’s most important showcase for foreign,
offbeat, and often-overlooked motion pictures. In her constant
quest for the new and the noncommercial, Film Forum’s longtime director, Karen Cooper, is credited with turning on New
York audiences to the German directors Werner Herzog, Wim
Wenders, and Rainer Werner Fassbinder long before they became fashionable with the mainstream. Similarly, Film Forum introduced American audiences to black-sheep Soviet filmmaker
Andrei Tarkovsky and his bizarre sci-fi visions of twentiethcentury life in Solaris and Stalker. A nonprofit operation, Film
Forum is supported by the New York State Council on the Arts,


SOHO/TRIBECA/NOLITA:

THE

“NEW”

NEW

YORK

281

the National Endowment for the Arts, several foundations and
corporations, and, most important, by individual movie lovers
who pay from $65 to $1,000 a year to become Friends of Film
Forum. In return, these friends get to see all Film Forum’s features at reduced rates plus additional benefits depending on the
level of contribution.
Call 212-727-8110 or visit www.filmforum.com.

2. RAOUL’S
180

Prince

Street

A hip little SoHo bistro, where you travel through the kitchen to
reach the rear dining room, Raoul’s and especially its kitchen
are featured in Addicted to Love (1997). The film’s hero, Matthew Broderick, gets a job washing dishes here in his efforts to
get revenge on the restaurant’s obnoxious French owner, Anton

(Tchéky Karyo), who has stolen the affections of Broderick’s girlfriend. In one particularly hilarious scene, Broderick unleashes

an army of cockroaches the night that the New York Times food
critic has dropped by to review the place. The critic is played by
Vanity Fair columnist Dominick Dunne, who happens to be the
father of the film’s director, Griffin Dunne. Raoul’s has also appeared—sans cockroaches—in A Perfect Murder (1998) and in
Martin Scorsese’s The King of Comedy (1983).
For reservations,

call 272-966-3518.

——=E———

s.r

Columnist Dominick
Dunne plays a

restaurant critic in

Addicted to Love
(1997), at Raoul’s with
Tchéky Karyo


282

NIEW

3. LOUIS
141

K. MEISEL

Prince

YOmR'K 2 FE

SMO E WeiNAIR2S) ‘GRADieE

GALLERY

Street

This SoHo art gallery made its name by featuring photorealist
painters in the 1970s. Just off the neighborhood’s main drag,
West Broadway, the Meisel establishment gained further notoriety in the late 1990s as the trendy gallery where Charlotte York
(Kristin Davis) worked for several seasons in Sex and the City.
4. TONY
119

SHAFRAZI

Wooster

GALLERY

Street

The Shafrazi Gallery is one of the many Downtown galleries that
Downtown artist/filmmaker Julian Schnabel used for his 1996
biopic on the short blazing life and career of Jean-Michel
Basquiat. Owner Tony Shafrazi, now a major player on the New
York art scene, made news during his student days in 1974,
when, to protest the Vietnam War, he sprayed-painted the words
“Kill lies all” (sic) on Picasso’s Guernica, which was on view at

the Metropolitan Museum of Art at the time. Mr. Shafrazi was
taken to the West 54th Street station house and was charged
with criminal mischief. “I’m an artist and I wanted to tell the
truth,” he said at the time. The paint, it turns out, was easily removed from the masterpiece. And the incident obviously didn’t
hurt Mr. Shafrazi’s subsequent career.
5. GHOST
112

LOFT

Mercer

Street

Demi Moore was a SoHo potter who lived, rather lavishly by
struggling-artist standards, in a spacious Mercer Street loft in
Ghost (1990). Moore’s serenity was turned upside down early on
in the film, when her husband, Patrick Swayze, is murdered. But
she quickly comes in contact with a bizarre psychic in the person

of Whoopi Goldberg, who brings Swayze very much back into her
life. The loft where Demi lived and worked a wicked wheel backed
by “Unchained Melody” was here in this classic nineteenthcentury cast iron—columned former SoHo factory building.


SOHO/TRIBECA/NOLITA:

6. FRAME
270

MAGAZINE

Lafayette

THE

“NEW”

NEW

YORK

283

:

Street

In avant-garde filmmaker Lisa Cholodenko’s story of love and
drugs among Manhattan’s Lipstick Lesbian crowd, High Art
(1998), much of the action revolves around the offices of Frame
magazine. It’s an ambitious Frame editor (Radha Mitchell) who

lures former big-time photographer Ally Sheedy back for one
last photo shoot. Complications result when Sheedy seduces the
editor, which does not sit well with Sheedy’s cocaine-addicted
German lover (Patricia Clarkson). Needless to say, Sheedy’s
comeback turns out to be a disaster. The magazine responsible
for it all was located at this hip SoHo loft building.
7. PUCK
295

BUILDING
Lafayette

Street

The former home of the Victorian humor magazine Puck, this
whimsical Romanesque brick castle at Lafayette and Houston
Streets is particularly notable for the two gilded figures of Puck,
a character from Shakespeare’s A Midsummer Night’s Dream,

Puck Building


284

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVERS?

GUIDE

that are part of the facade. Built in 1885 and handsomely restored a century later, the Puck Building is currently one of
SoHo’s coolest addresses. So it’s no surprise that interior decorator Grace Adler (Debra Messing) had the good taste to base her
design firm here in the TV series Will @ Grace. The Puck Building was also featured in When Harry Met Sally (1989), as the site
of the New Year’s Eve party where Billy Crystal finally declares
his love for Meg Ryan at the end of the film. In real life, the Puck
Building’s Victorian ballroom is frequently rented out for holiday
parties. The SoHo landmark is also currently the site of the Outsider Art Fair held each January, displaying works primarily by
untrained artists and artists who have spent time in prisons and
mental institutions.
8. KATZ’S
205

East

DELICATESSEN
Houston

Street

Even though it was fake, it was probably the most famous orgasm in the history of sex, not to mention the cinema. It was
here—amid all the pastrami, salami, corned beef, brisket, and

Katz’s Delicatessen
a


SOHO/TRIBECA/NOLITA:

THE

“NEW”

NEW

YORK

285

1989
Meg Ryan and Billy Crystal at Katz’s in When Harry Met Sally,
a

sauerkraut—that Meg Ryan showed Billy Crystal just how easy
it was for a woman to fake a climax in the film When Harry Met
Sally (1989). Fake or not, the lady dining nearby (in fact, director Rob Reiner’s mother), overhearing Meg’s oohs and aahs, uttered the famous line to her waiter: “I’ll have what she’s having.”
In 2004, a stage version of the film opened in London starring
Alyson Hannigan (of Buffy the Vampire Slayer fame) and Luke
Perry (formerly of Beverly Hills 90210); it was largely panned
the
by the critics, who felt even the orgasm came off better in
movie.
a scene
Katz’s was also a location in Donnie Brasco (1997), in
his
where undercover agent Johnny Depp meets with some of
faer
FBI colleagues. Donnie Brasco also gave the world anoth
Johnny
mous expression: “Fhuggedaboudit!” The phrase, as
film,
Depp/Donnie Brasco points out to an FBI colleague in the
agree
you
if
has different meanings: “ ‘Forget about it’ is like
great piece
with someone, you know, like ‘Raquel Welch is one
Lincoln
of ass, forget about it.’ But then, if you disagree, like ‘A
But then,
‘s better than a Cadillac? Forget about it!’ you know?
world, like
it’s also like if something’s the greatest thing in the


286

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Michelle Pfeiffer’s Married to the Mob gig: Beautiful Hair Unisex
Salon
SS

a

mangia those peppers, ‘forget about it.’ But it’s also like saying

‘Go to hell!’ too. Like, you know, like ‘Hey, Paulie, you got a
one-inch pecker?’ and Paulie says ‘Forget about it!’ Sometimes it
just means forget about it.”
Visit www.katzdeli.com,

9. BEAUTIFUL
20

Clinton

HAIR

UNISEX

SALON

Street

Showbiz has not gone to the head of this Lower East Side barber
beauty shop. Despite the fact that this is the place where
Michelle Pfeiffer wound up working after her husband was offed
and she tried to start a new life in Lower Manhattan inMarri
ed
to the Mob (1988), this unpretentious SoHo salon offers a
shampoo and cut for $15.


SOHO/TRIBECA/NOLITA:

10.

OLD
264

THE

“NEW”

NEW

YORK

287

PATRICK’S CATHEDRAL
Mulberry Street
ST.

Everyone knows the “new” St. Patrick’s Cathedral, the massive neo-Gothic Catholic church with twin 330-foot spires that
stands on Fifth Avenue between 50th and 51st Streets. Built besive
tween 1879 and 1906, it is one of the city’s most impres
’s
houses of worship. Much less well known is Old St. Patrick
rebuilt
1815,
Cathedral down in Little Italy, which was built in
ic
in 1868 after a fire, and reigned as the city’s premier Cathol
and
church until its grander Midtown sibling took away its title
ant
cachet. Now a parish church, Old St. Patrick’s is an import
various
Little Italy landmark and as such has played roles in
GodThe
is
films set in the neighborhood. The classic, of course,
ening of
father (1972), where the church was used for the christ
now stands
Connie’s son, at which Michael Corleone (Al Pacino)
Brando);
n
(Marlo
as godfather after the death of his father, Vito

eliminated.
the scene is intercut with his enemies being brutally
III, when
Part
The church then turns up again in The Godfather:
is being
an older Michael, now a “respectable” businessman,
also
can
’s
presented with a high church honor. Old St. Patrick
e’s hard-edged
be seen in Mean Streets (1973), Martin Scorses

of the film was
portrait of Little Italy street life. Although much
tive walled
shot in Hollywood, Scorsese used St. Patrick’s distinc

Old St. Patrick’s
Cathedral


288

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

courtyard for a private conversation between the film’s stars,
Robert De Niro and Harvey Keitel. Sex and the City has also
been by.
11. MULBERRY
176’.

STREET

Mulberry

BAR

Street

Today Mulberry Street is filled with the cool bars and restaurants
that are a signature of the new Little Italy. But back in the days
when the neighborhood was filled with Old World bakeries, Italian social clubs, and mom-and-pop grocery stores, one of Mulberry Street’s longtime landmarks was a joint called Mare
Chiaro, which dated back to the turn of the last century. In the
old days, the place sported oak-paneled walls, sawdust on the
floor, bright overhead lights, card tables, and lots of Sinatra on
the jukebox. In fact, Mare Chiaro was known as the Sinatra Bar,
in honor of its most famous regular customer. Others who
dropped by over the years included Ronald Reagan, Madonna,
and the late George Plimpton, whose Paris Review editors used
to meet here once a week. Needless to say, it’s not surprising that
this classic slice of Little Italy wound up in at least one Godfather film, in this case Godfather III (1990). It’s also appeared in
The Pope of Greenwich Village (1984), 94 Weeks (1986), and
various episodes of The Sopranos. It’s particularly memorable in
Donnie Brasco (1997), as the bar where Johnny Depp as undercover FBI agent Donnie Brasco meets Mafia operative Al Pacino,
who asks him to “middle” a stolen diamond ring for him. Brasco
immediately recognizes that it’s a “fugazy” (fake).
For movie lovers wishing to see the old Mare Chiaro, best
to
rent a video or DVD of one of the above films, since the bar
was
recently sold and has been rechristened the Mulberry Street
Bar.
No more sawdust on the floor, but Sinatra still rules the jukebo
x.
Another Mulberry Street tradition that still goes on is the annual
San Gennaro Festival honoring the patron saint of Naples
, which
turns the area into an old-fashioned Italian-American carniv
al
every September.


SOHO/TRIBECA/NOLITA:

“NEW”

THE

NEW

YORK

289

Lee
eee

ooo:

pS

Sex and the City regular: O’Neal’s Grand Street
sss...

—=_

12. O’NEAL’S

GRAND

174 Grand

Street

STREET

BAR

AND

RESTAURANT

Better known to Sex and the City addicts as Scout, this was the
SoHo watering hole run by Carrie and Miranda’s former boyfriends Aidan and Steve. On the TV show, the drink du jour was
always the vodka—cranberry juice-Triple Sec concoction known
as the Cosmopolitan. Today, with Sex and the City now in reruns, Cosmos are on the wane and the up-and-coming cocktail is
the kiwi-lime martini.
13. CAFE
32

NOIR

Grand

Street

When it comes to on-screen sex, perhaps nobody does it better
than British director Adrian Lyne. Witness the intense sado9%
masochistic coupling of Kim Basinger and Mickey Rourke in
Glenn
Weeks (1986) and the Fatal Attraction (1987) that brought
end
Close and Michael Douglas together. But the assignation to


290

NEW

YORK?

THE

"MOVE

SOV ERS

Gui De

Unfaithful hot
spot

all assignations has got to be the quickie between Diane Lane
and Olivier Martinez in Lyne’s 2002 Unfaithful that took place
in a stall of the ladies’ room at this venerable SoHo café, while
Lane was between cappuccinos with two of her unsuspecting
suburban girlfriends.
SSS

Dangerous liaison: Diane Lane and Olivier Martine
z in Unfaithful, 2002


THE

SOHO/TRIBECA/NOLITA:

Moondance
(a

14.

NEW

YORK

291

Diner
SSS

a

MOONDANCE
80

“NEW”

Avenue

ES

DINER

of the

Americas

This funky diner on the edge of SoHo has provided on-screen
employment for both Kirsten Dunst and Courteney Cox. Cox
as Monica in Friends once worked at Moondance as a waitress, wearing Dolly Parton falsies that caught on fire, in a famous episode of the TV series. On the other hand, Dunst wears
standard-issue waitress drag for her Moondance gig in SpiderMan (2002). An aspiring actress in the film, she is highly embarrassed when she bumps into her neighbor Tobey Maguire .
outside her workplace—especially since she’s started dating Tobey’s super-wealthy best friend Harry and doesn’t want him
to know about her day job. Meanwhile, Tobey is much more
upset by the fact that Dunst is interested in Harry and not him.
The diner is also one of the many SoHo nightspots that Griffn Dunne and Rosanna Arquette hit in Martin Scorsese’s After
Hours (1985).


292

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Capsuto Fréres

15. CAPSUTO
451

FRERES

Washington

Street

The ground floor of this many-gabled 1891 landmark building at
the edge of the Holland Tunnel between SoHo and TriBeCa has
been the longtime home of the fashionable, high-ceilinged French
restaurant Capsuto Fréres. The building has also provided trendy
downtown digs for the Divine Miss Bette Midler, her buddy
Barry Manilow, and fashion photographer/filmmaker (Let’s Get
Lost, 1988) Bruce Weber. On the small screen, the building and
restaurant have been featured in Law & Order.
For reservations, call 212-966-4900.

16.

AMERICAN
260

West

THREAD

BUILDING

Broadway

Built in 1896 as the headquarters for the New York Wool
Exchange, this handsome eleven-story structure facing
TriBeCa
Park is one of Lower Manhattan’s most luxurious
addresses.


SOHO/TRIBECA/NOLITA:

THE

NEW

“NEW”

YORK

2935

Among its starry former tenants have been rock’s madcap Cyndi
Lauper, the late John F. Kennedy’ Jr., and Ingrid Bergman’s
model/movie-actress daughter, Isabella Rossellini. In the early
1970s, Ms. Rossellini made ends meet in Manhattan by teaching
Italian classes at the American Express Language Center and at
the New School.
17.

HOOK
14

AND

North

LADDER

Moore

COMPANY

8

Street

When Saturday Night Live superstars Bill Murray and Dan
Aykroyd took their talents to the big screen, none of their films
was ever quite as hysterical—or successful—as 1984’s runaway
hit Ghostbusters. In the film, the boys venture into the ghostexterminating business and wind up saving Manhattan from
some rather frightening ectoplasmic infestations. For their headquarters in the film, the Number 8 Hook and Ladder firehouse

Ghostbusters’
firehouse


294

NEWYORK:

THE

*MOVIE

LOVERS’

GUIDE

in TriBeCa provided the perfect location—at least for the exterior sequences. The interiors, it turns out, were all done at a firehouse in Los Angeles. Why two firehouses? For one thing
Ghostbusters, whose principal photography was based at the
Burbank (now Warner Bros.) Studios in L.A., was on a tight
schedule for its location shots in New York. For another, the

Moore Street firehouse is still in the business of fighting fires,
whereas the firehouse used for the interiors in Los Angeles was
one that had been decommissioned.
The same New York firehouse was again used for exteriors in
Ghostbusters II (1987), which featured virtually the same cast.
Number 8 Hook and Ladder was also deeply involved in the rescue efforts connected with the 9/11 catastrophe and mourned the
death of its own Lt. Vincent G. Halloran in the process. A measure to rename North Moore Street between Varick and West
Broadway for the late lieutenant is currently being considered by
the city.
18. TRIBECA
375

FILM

Greenwich

CENTER
Street

In the late 1980s, actor and longtime TriBeCa resident Robert De
Niro was a major force behind turning a seven-story former coffee warehouse into one of New York’s most exciting film centers.
Not a movie house, Tribeca Film Center is a production-friendly
site offering long- and short-term office space, studios, screening
rooms, and other support services for companies involved in all
aspects of filmmaking. Over the years, Steven Spielberg, Ron
Howard, Quincy Jones, and De Niro’s own Tribeca Productions
have all had bases here. In 1990, a then little-known company
called Miramax moved to 375 Greenwich Street, which remains
its New York headquarters.
Another feature of the Tribeca Film Center is its trendy
ground-floor Tribeca Grill, which opened in 1990 and boasts
quite a lineup of celebrity backers—Bill Murray, Sean Penn,
Christopher Walken, and Mikhail Baryshnikov among themn—
and regulars. Post-September 11, the Grill was one of many local
restaurants that provided meals to local families and rescue
workers during the aftermath of the World Trade Center attacks.
It was also in the wake of that same tragedy that De Niro and his


SOHO/TRIBECA/NOLITA:

THE

“NEW”

ae"

NEW

YORK

295

Tribeca Film Center

associates were inspired to establish the Tribeca Film Festival, as
a gesture of faith in what was then a devastated Lower Manhattan. Open to U.S. and international feature, short, and documentary films, the first festival—organized in just 120 days—took
place in May 2002 and drew an audience of 150,000. The next
year the numbers more than doubled, and the Tribeca Film Festival is now an important event on the world film-festival circuit. In
addition to screenings and panel discussions, the festival features
art exhibits and installations, concerts, and a special Drive-In sethe
ries of classic American films shown outdoors on Pier 25 on
Hudson River.
. For Tribeca
For reservations at the Tribeca Grill, call 212-941-3900
tival.org.
Film Festival information, log onto www. tribecafilmfes


296

19.

NEW

GIGINO
323

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

TRATTORIA

Greenwich

Street

In his decidedly Downtown 2000 comedy, Dinner Rush, director
Bob Giraldi documents both the back- and front-of-house dramas and traumas associated with the running of a hip TriBeCa
restaurant. Seemingly filmed in real time, Dinner Rush actually
shot for a month at a real TriBeCa restaurant, Gigino Trattoria,
which the film’s executive producer Phil Suarez just happened to
own.
Visit www.giginony.com.

20.

CORTLANDT

ALLEY

In a city that makes movies without the luxury of studio back
lots, when an alley is needed for a mugging, gun fight, or fatal
confrontation between hero and villain, this Lower Manhattan
cul-de-sac is often called on to fill the bill. Movie lovers have
seen it in such features as Highlander (1986), FX (1986), Crocodile Dundee (1986), Basquiat (1996), Addicted to Love (1997);
Small Time Crooks (2000), and In the Cut (2003). On TV it’s
been used by The Equalizer, NYPD Blue, and Law & Order.
