
The Upper West Side:
Rebel Territory

Just as there is the East Coast and the West Coast, there is the
Upper East Side and the Upper West Side. And despite the fact
that there’s only Central Park, rather than a whole country, separating these two Manhattan neighborhoods, they are often as
different in outlook and spirit as New York is from California.
Whereas the East Side has a reputation for being the bastion
of establishment Manhattan, the West Side has been noted for
its individuality, its liberal politics, its cultural pursuits. Granted,
the West Side has lost some of its brashness and originality
through decades of gentrification and Yuppiefication, but oldtimers, proud of the way things used to be, are hanging on to
their traditions and trying hard to keep their neighborhood
unique. Classic Upper West Siders from the world of show business include rebels like Lauren Bacall, Barbra Streisand, Mia Farrow, William Hurt, Cicely Tyson, Bruce Willis, Alec Baldwin,
Robert Duvall, Mick Jagger, Kevin Bacon,, Teri Garr, Dustin
Hoffman, Christopher Walken, Faye Dunaway, Michael J. Fox,
John Lennon, Yoko Ono, Madonna, Sean Penn, and the greatest
rebel of them all—James Dean.
Almost as intriguing as the stars who have called the Upper
West Side home are the extraordinary buildings that many of


$26

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

them have occupied. Landmarks of Art Deco, Beaux Arts, or
Gothic Revival architecture, the great celebrity apartment buildings of Central Park West and Broadway stun with their style
and their diversity. Ultimately, diversity is what the Upper West
Side is all about—and that includes cultural diversity. Witness
the West Side location of Lincoln Center, New York’s “acropolis
of the performing arts,” home to opera, symphony, ballet, theater, and, of special interest to movie lovers, one of the country’s
most important cinema events—the New York Film Festival,
held every autumn.
1. COLUMBUS

CIRCLE

While traffic circles are commonplace in European cities such
as London, Paris, and Rome—Manhattan, with its grid-straight
street setup, has precious few. Arguably the most notable is Co-

Columbus Circle, 1953: Judy Holliday and Heywood
Should Happen to You
SE

ST

Hale Broun in /t

:
EI

TTA

ETE ECE


THE

UPPER

WEST

SIDE:

REBEL

TERRITORY

327

Columbus Circle, 2004:
Trump International
Hotel and Tower

lumbus Circle, which was named for the oft-disputed “discoverer” of America, who is remembered here with a statue rising
from a central fountain. Like Times Square, this impressive intersection—which marks the convergence of Central Park South,
Central Park West, Eighth Avenue, and Broadway—has had sev-

eral distinct incarnations in the last fifty years. In the late 1940s
and early 1950s, for example, Columbus Circle had a formal,
Old World feel, edged at the time mainly by low-rise buildings,
with Central Park an integral part of the picture. To see it as it
was then, On the Town (1949) has a lovely Columbus Circle se-

quence, but the film that documents it best is George Cukor’s
1954 It Should Happen to You, where unsuccessful actress Judy
Holliday takes one last shot at fame by putting her name—
Gladys Glover—on a vacant Columbus Circle billboard. Especially memorable is the scene with Holliday and a young Peter
Lawford—the Hugh Grant of his era—circling and recircling


328

NEW

YORK?

THE

MOV

NES EOW BR Se GU) DE

Columbus Circle in Lawford’s white Jaguar convertible to check
out the sign. Are you in Manhattan—or Rome?
In the 1960s, Columbus Circle started looking considerably
less European, as dramatic new buildings such as the white marble Huntington Hartford Museum, the New York Coliseum, and
the forty-four-story Gulf + Western Building (where Paramount
Pictures, then part of the G+W conglomerate, was headquartered) radically altered its profile. In the mid-1970s, this new
Columbus Circle was an important location for Martin Scorsese’s
Taxi Driver (1976), as the site of a big political rally during which
the sociopath ex-Marine played by Robert De Niro attempts to
assassinate New York’s mayor. Two years later, the site was again
used for a shooting, this time in thriller Eyes of Laura Mars,
where Faye Dunaway played a photographer stalked by a killer.
Cut to 2004. Paramount, now part of a different conglomerate—Viacom—has moved to Times Square; the former Gulf +
Western Building now belongs to Donald Trump, who spent
many millions glitzing it into Trump International Hotel and
Tower; and the old New York Coliseum has been razed and is
now home to the dazzling twin eighty-story skyscrapers of Time
Warner Center, which encompasses the luxurious Mandarin Oriental Hotel, an upscale dining-shopping-entertainment center,
the New York studios of CNN, and the new East Coast headquarters for another legendary old Hollywood studio, Warner
Bros. Now all the place needs is a good movie. Stay tuned.
2. MAYFLOWER
15

Central

HOTEL

Park

West

Once alittle funky, now rather posh, the Mayflower has traditionally attracted writers (it’s a favorite of transgendered British travel
writer Jan Morris), musicians (Lincoln Center is just a block
away), and long-stay guests (its rooms used to be relatively inexpensive and many had kitchenettes). In the last category was Jack
Nicholson, who in Wolf (1994) checked into the Mayflower after
being downgraded by his publishing company and cuckolded by
his wife, Kate Nelligan. Things pick up for Jack after a bizarre encounter with a wolf makes him a force to be reckoned with.
Visit www.mayflowerhotel.com.


THE

UPPER

WEST

SIDE;

3. LINCOLN

CENTER

Columbus

Avenue

REBEL

from

62nd

TERRITORY

to

66th

S29

Streets

Home to opera, ballet, symphonic music, and theater, the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts is one of the largest and
most impressive complexes of its kind in the world. What many
people have forgotten is that Manhattan’s arts acropolis stands
on land that was once a neighborhood of dreary brick tenement
buildings. In 1961, before they were torn down to make way for
Lincoln Center, these old West Side blocks had abrief fling with
show business when they were called on to furnish the realistic
locales for some of the scenes in United Artists’ West Side Story.
Later, filmmaking would return to the area in a big way once
Lincoln Center made its debut as a dramatic—and cameraready—New York City landmark.
Especially photogenic is Lincoln Center’s main plaza, which
clusters the New York State Theater, the Metropolitan Opera
House, and Avery Fisher Hall around a black-marble fountain.
Movie lovers may remember the tour of a then still-new Lincoln
Center given by Lee Remick, who worked here as a guide in No
Way to Treat a Lady (1968), where she points out to her group
the Henry Moore sculptures in the reflecting pool and the thirty-

Arts acropolis: Lincoln Center, 1987
ss


330

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

foot-high Chagalls in the Metropolitan Opera House lobby,
which the great artist helped install. A few years later, Det. Frank
Serpico (Al Pacino) indulged in his taste for things cultural with
a night at the ballet at Lincoln Center in Sidney Lumet’s Serpico
(1972). More recently, Lincoln Center doubled for the Dorothy
Chandler Pavilion in L.A. for the Academy Awards ceremony
in In & Out (1997), where an Oscar winner accidentally “outs”
his closeted gay former teacher (Kevin Kline). Ironically, the
Dorothy Chandler Pavilion in L.A. doubled for Lincoln Center
in the late Herbert Ross’s saga of two dancers (Shirley MacLaine
and Anne Bancroft) in The Turning Point (1977).
Of all of Lincoln Center’s locations, arguably its famous fountain has been used most—in films such as Ghostbusters (1984),
Moonstruck (1987), and recently Sweet Home Alabama (2002),
where New York City’s first lady-mayor, a rather snobbish Candice Bergen, while officiating at a red-carpet gala, gets the unwelcome news that her son is engaged to a cheap Southern fashion
designer (Reese Witherspoon). By far the fountain’s most memorable screen appearance, however, was in Mel Brooks’s outrageous 1967 comedy, The Producers. In the Lincoln Center
sequence, Zero Mostel is trying to convince Gene Wilder that
there’s big money to be made in producing a bound-to-flop
Broadway musical called Springtime for Hitler. When Wilder
finally says yes to Mostel’s cockamamie scheme, all the lights of
the Metropolitan Opera House come up full, the fountain starts

going crazy, and fireworks finish off the fantasy.
Serious movie lovers will also be interested in two Lincoln
Center buildings beyond the main plaza area. The first is the
New York Public Library and Museum of Performing Arts at
111 Amsterdam Avenue. Here, on the third floor, the Billy Rose
Theater Collection is one of the country’s major research facilities for theater, radio, television, and film. The other Lincoln

Center building that draws movie lovers is Alice Tully Hall,
which every September—October hosts most of the presentations
of the Film Society of Lincoln Center’s prestigious New York
Film Festival (Avery Fisher Hall is used for the festival’s opening
and closing nights).
Credited with staging the U.S. premieres of some of the
world’s most important films, the New York Film Festival is


¢

POE

EPR RAWIE ST

She SREB

Bi

ERROR Y

331

where New Yorkers first got to see Jan Kadar’s The Shop on
Main Street (1965), Gillo Pontecorvo’s The Battle of Algiers
(1965), Eric Rohmer’s My Night at Maud’s (1969), Bernardo
Bertolucci’s The Conformist (1970), Bob Rafelson’s Five Easy
Pieces (1970), Louis Malle’s Murmur of the Heart (1971), Peter
Bogdanovich’s The Last Picture Show (1971), Luis Bufiuel’s The
Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie (1972), Rainer Werner Fassbinder’s The Bitter Tears of Petra von Kant (1973), Martin
Scorsese’s Mean Streets (1973), Francois Truffaut’s Day for
Night (1973), Wim Wenders’s The American Friend (1977),
Truffaut’s The Last Metro (1980), Werner Herzog’s Fitzcarraldo
(1982), Lawrence Kasdan’s The Big Chill (1983), Akira Kurosawa’s Ran (1985), Maximilian Schell’s Marlene (1986), Francis
Ford Coppola’s Peggy Sue Got Married (1986), John Boorman’s
Hope and Glory (1987), Yurek Bogayevicz’s Anna (1987), Mike
Leigh’s Secrets and Lies (1996), Ang Lee’s The Ice Storm (1997),
Pedro Almodovar’s All About My Mother (1999), and Lars von
Trier’s Dancer in the Dark (2000).
For information on the New York Film Festival as well as on the
New Directors/New Films festival (March-April), which Lincoln
Center cosponsors with the Museum

of Modern Art, write Film

Society of Lincoin Center, 70 Lincoln Center Plaza, New York, NY
10023-6595,

4. ABC

West

or log onto www.filmlinc.com.

CAMPUS

66th/67th

Streets

Part of the Disney empire, the American Broadcasting Company
has taken over so much of West 66th and 67th Streets from Central Park West to West End Avenue that the corridor has become
known as the network’s “campus.” TV fans may be interested
in checking out the following campus addresses: 47 West 66th
Street—where World News Tonight originates; 56 West 66th
Street—longtime home of the soap opera One Life to Live; 77
West 66th Street-—ABC headquarters; 7 Lincoln Square—Live
with Regis and Kelly!; 320 West 66th Street—All My Children and The View; and 30 West 67th Street: Millionaire. ABC’s
highest-visibility facility, however, is its Times Square Stu-


SSi2

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

dios, with huge windows at Seventh Avenue and 43rd Street,
where Good Morning America and 20/20 overlook Times
Square and vice versa (see Chapter 3, item 8).
5. GHOSTBUSTERS
55

Central

Park

BUILDING
West

New Yorkers often have to put up with a lot for the privilege
of living in the Big Apple. Exorbitant rents, ancient plumbing,
roaches, noise—but nobody had it quite as bad as Sigourney
Weaver when she resided on Central Park West in the 1984 film
Ghostbusters. Terror dogs! Lecherous arm chairs! Leaping eggs!
Evil refrigerators! Who ya gonna call? For Sigourney’s Ghostbusters building, a real Central Park West apartment house
(whose celebrity residents have included designer Calvin Klein

Ghostbusters Harold Ramis,
Dan Aykroyd, and Bill Murray
on Central Park West, 1984


&

PE

WIP

BRE Sie SDE a Re Biel

i ERR

TOR Y

333

and actress Marsha Mason) was used for many exteriors, but the
exotic pre-Columbian temple that appeared to be on the roof of
55 Central Park West was created—for long shots—by matte
artist Matthew Yuricich. Meanwhile, for medium shots a fifteenfoot model of the temple was used; and for close-ups with actors,
a full-scale temple complex was built at the Burbank (now
Warner Bros.) Studios on the West Coast. For the scene where
the street caves in at the end of the film, parts of the sequence
were done in New York at 55 Central Park West, while others
were lensed at the Columbia (now Warner Bros.) Ranch in Burbank, California, where the facade of the New York apartment
building was reconstructed, along with a hydraulically controlled collapsing street! Ultimately the whole sequence was put

together in the editing room.
This Central Park West address, it turns out, was not the

Ghostbusters company’s first choice for an apartment building.
They really wanted to use 1 Fifth Avenue—both for its Art Deco
architecture and its proximity to Washington Square—but 1
Fifth’s co-op board nixed the plan.
6. HOTEL

DES

ARTISTES

1 West

67th

Street

Originally built to house painters and sculptors, this beautiful
1918 building—with studios that feature double-height windows
and wonderful light—quickly began to draw artistic residents
from other fields. One of these was America’s hottest male movie
star, Rudolph Valentino, who rented a bachelor pad at Des
Artistes in 1922, even though he was married to his second wife,
Natacha Rambova, at the time. Actually, he was only sort of
married to Miss Rambova, because his divorce from his first
wife, Jean Acker, would not be final in California until the following year. Like many movie people at the time, Valentino had
tried to get around California’s tough divorce laws by wedding
Natacha in Mexico. Upon their return to California, however,
there was an uproar that resulted in Valentino’s being charged
with bigamy and having to spend a night in jail. Fed up with

Hollywood’s provincialism and also with his studio (Paramount)
for offering him little help with his legal difficulties, Valentino


334

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

and Natacha escaped to New York. Not wanting to risk any
more trouble with the authorities or with the press, however,
Valentino moved into Des Artistes alone. This wasn’t too much
of a hardship, though, because Natacha resided with an aunt
who lived on the same West 67th Street block. Also, by the following year Valentino’s divorce had gone through, and both
Valentinos were able to live together legally at Des Artistes. It
was during his Des Artistes period that Valentino also settled his
differences with Paramount and went on to make his two New
York pictures, Monsieur Beaucaire and A Sainted Devil, at the
Astoria Studios in Queens. But by 1924, Valentino was working
and living in Hollywood once again, and by 1925, his marriage
to Natacha was on the rocks.
Besides Valentino, Des Artistes also counts among its famous
former and current residents artist Norman Rockwell, dancer

Hotel des Artistes


TaBhiEs

U/PeP BRE

Sal

SDE

RE BBs gre RRs
TO RY

335

The Valentinos in New
York: Rudolph and wife
Natacha

Rambova

Isadora Duncan, novelist Fannie Hurst, playwright/performer
Noél Coward, Algonquin Round Table wit Alexander Woollcott,
former New York City mayor and sometime newscaster John
Lindsay, and actors Richard Thomas and Joel Grey.
Taking over much of the ground floor of the Hotel des
Artistes is the elegant Café des Artistes—noted for its naughty
murals by erstwhile resident Howard Chandler Christy. The
restaurant was featured in Louis Malle’s groundbreaking twocharacter (Wallace Shawn and André Gregory) My Dinner with
André (1981). It was also used in the Richard Benjamin—directed
farce The Money Pit (1986), and it is at this chic café that Diane
Keaton, Bette Midler, and Goldie Hawn have a nostalgic lunch
after attending a college friend’s funeral in The First Wives Club
(1996).
Visit www.cafedesartistesnyc.com.


336

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER'S

GUIDE

At Tavern on the Green: Joseph Cotten and Ethel Barrymore in Portrait
of Jennie, 1948

7. TAVERN

ON

THE

Central

Park

West

GREEN
at

67th

Street

The Land of Oz is alive and well in Central Park at Tavern
on the Green. A sheepfold in the 1870s, the building became
a restaurant in the 1930s, but it wasn’t until Warner LeRoy
(1935-2001) got his hands on the place in 1974 that Tavern on
the Green became one of the city’s most dazzling dining rooms.

With strong Hollywood roots—LeRoy’s father was director/producer Mervyn LeRoy (The Wizard of Oz); his mother, Doris, was
Harry Warner’s daughter—Warner LeRoy gave Tavern on the
Green the total Tinseltown treatment, redoing it with brass,
glass, mirrors, crystal chandeliers, and pastel-painted plaster of

Paris. Most opulent of the various dining rooms is the Crystal
Room, agreat glass pavilion that looks out on gardens—and, at
night, trees strung with fairy lights—backed by Central Park.

Movie lovers may remember the scene in Ghostbusters (1984)


¢

hie

URE BR AWE Si SS NDE SREB

Ek

iE RR TORY

S37,

where Rick Moranis, pursued by a red-eyed, fang-toothed “terror dog,” pounds on the glass wall of the Crystal Room desperately trying to get the attention of the diners on the other side. In
true New York fashion, everyone in the restaurant keeps right
on eating, trying their best not to notice the horror show going
on outside.
In 1989, the restaurant was especially popular with Woody
Allen, who dined here alfresco with his mother (who kvetches
about the table) in the “Oedipus Wrecks” sequence of New York
Stories and inside with Alan Alda in Crimes and Misdemeanors.
Tavern on the Green is also where James Caan, as the novelist in
Stephen King’s Misery (1990), celebrated his latest best seller—
though he would have little to celebrate once he met up with
Kathy Bates. And speaking of celebrations, Bette Midler, who
had given up her illegitimate daughter to be raised by her
wealthy father in Stella (1990), stood outside and watched the
young woman get married in the Tavern’s Terrace Room in this
remake of the 1937 Barbara Stanwyck classic Stella Dallas.
Meanwhile, to see what the place was like in its pre-Warner
LeRoy days, movie lovers should check out another classic—
David O. Selznick’s 1948 Portrait of Jennie, which shows Joseph
Cotten and Ethel Barrymore having cocktails here.
Visit www.tavernonthegreen.com.

8. JAMES

DEAN

19

68th

West

APARTMENT
Street

“Across the room on the shoulder-high shelf that ran the width
and length of the entire room were empty beer cans, an open
peanut butter jar, an album cover of Romeo and Juliet, a baseball bat, a hot plate, a bunch of dried leaves stuck in a Maxwell
House can, several sheets of music and a bust of Jimmy gazing
down upon a new chrome music stand.” That’s how (in David
Dalton’s James Dean: The Mutant King, St. Martin’s, 1975) an

actress friend of his described the tiny twelve-by-twelve room—
with bathroom down the hall—that was James Dean’s Upper
West Side home before he went off to Hollywood in 1954 to
shoot his first major film, East of Eden. Despite the fact that he


338

NEWS

YORKS

THE “MOY (EV EOW ER Ss Guilt

was heading for the big time, Jimmy Dean held on to his minuscule New York City pad, and stayed there in January 1955 when
he returned to the city after having wrapped Eden as well as a
couple of television shows on the West Coast. It was to have
been a happy reunion with the city he loved—a time to see old
friends, visit old hangouts, and revel in his newfound success. It
turned out to be anything but. Throughout the visit, Jimmy’s behavior was extremely erratic. He was edgy, ill at ease, often
nasty. Some friends accused him of having “gone Hollywood.”
Others felt he was strung out on drugs. There was a particularly
unpleasant episode with his former girlfriend, Barbara Glenn,
when she broke the news to Jimmy that she had gotten engaged
during his absence from the city. At first he took it well, and even
had dinner with Barbara and her fiancé. But the next day, he
pleaded with her to come by his apartment for a talk. There, he
opened upa suitcase full of cash and ordered her to help herself
to the stash, since she had lent him money during his starvingactor days. When she refused the money and insisted that it
was all over between them, Jimmy got hysterical, screamed at

James

Dean’s

West Side digs


Pie

VUiPP BR

AEST

WS

‘SiiDE

y

REBEL

ty

TERRITORY

339

Uj

West Side rebel:
James

Dean

her, and threw wads of money at her as she left the apartment.
His last words were: “And when I die, it’ll be your fault!”
Jimmy left New York soon thereafter, never to see the city or
his West 68th Street digs again. The car crash that ended his life
and burgeoning career lay just nine months ahead of him. Today,
a half century later, the little building with the bow windows that
James Dean called home still stands off Central Park West on
68th Street. Ironically, Dean’s last NYC address is just five blocks

away from his first, which was a room at the West Side YMCA
at 5 West 63rd Street, where he stayed when he landed in the Big
Apple in the fall of 1951.
9. MAYA
106

SCHAPER

West

69th

CHEESE

AND

ANTIQUES

Street

Nora Ephron wrote and directed this cyber version of Ernst
Lubitsch’s 1939 Jimmy Stewart-Margaret Sullavan comedy The
Shop Around the Corner (1939). The story of two people who
don’t get along in the workplace but are much more compatible


340

NEW.

YOR

Kis THE

MOVIES

FOV ER&St GU) DIE

Maya Schaper Cheese and Antiques (Meg Ryan’s You’ve Got Mail
bookstore)
SSS

SESE

SALES SEE SSE a

IE

TELS EE

ET TIT

ETS

as secret pen pals, the film was remade a decade later as the
MGM musical In the Good Old Summertime with Judy Garland
and Van Johnson. Enter Ephron a half century later with You’ve
Got Mail (1998), a slick take on the classic tale that has Meg
Ryan as the owner of an eccentric Upper West Side bookstore
threatened by the latest branch of a mega-book emporium chain,
which Tom Hanks is opening across the street from her. In the
Ephron version, Meg and Tom are not only secret e-mail buddies
but they each have other significant others. Meg’s little bookstore was actually this well-known West Side establishment that
deals not in books but in the odd combo of cheese and antiques.
10.

THE

DAKOTA

1 West

72nd

Street

In 1884, the New York Daily Graphic called it “one of the most
perfect apartment houses in the world.” Besides offering the
most lavish apartments that New Yorkers had ever encountered,


THe

UPPER

WESTSIDE:

REBEM

TERRITORY

341

the Dakota also provided some of the best views in town. “Every
prominent landmark in the landscape can be discerned from this
location,” the Daily Graphic gushed on, “and the great buildings
of the lower city are as prominently marked as if the sightseer
were floating over the island in a balloon.”
Today, some

120 years later, the Dakota still has fabulous

apartments and drop-dead views. It also boasts one of the most
remarkable tenant rosters of any building in the country. Among
the Dakota’s most famous former and current residents are Lauren Bacall, Judy Holliday, Zachary Scott, Teresa Wright, Robert
Ryan, Marian Mercer, Rex Reed, Kent Smith, William Inge,
John Frankenheimer, Jack Palance, Roberta Flack, Fannie Hurst,
Rudolf Nureyev, John Madden, Judy Garland, Gwen Verdon,
José Ferrer and Rosemary Clooney, Eric Portman, Warner
LeRoy, John Lennon and Yoko Ono, Gilda Radner, Connie

Chung, and a mild-mannered gentleman whose real name was
William Henry Pratt, but whom movie lovers know as Boris
Karloff.

The Dakota


342

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Stories of the Dakota’s star tenants abound. Boris Karloff, for
example, evidently felt very unloved every Halloween, because
the kids in the building were too afraid of his horror-film image
to take any of the trick-or-treat candy he left outside his door.
Another legend of the Dakota, reported by Stephen Birmingham
in Life at the Dakota (Random House, 1979), is the saga of Lauren Bacall’s air conditioners. Since the building has landmark
status, the New York Landmarks Commission must give its blessing to any renovations planned by Dakota tenants. When Bacall
wanted to knock out some exterior bricks to install through-the-

wall air-conditioning units, she asked a fellow tenant who was
familiar with the workings of the Landmarks Commission to
plead her case before the commissioner. When the official! found
out just who wanted permission to install the air conditioners, he
hinted that he would prefer to see the legendary actress in person. A meeting was arranged at Miss Bacall’s apartment at cocktail time. Bacall, whose standard Dakota drag consisted of slacks
and an old sweater, pulled out all the stops and received the city

Trouble at the
Dakota:

Ruth Gordon,
Sidney Blackmer,
and Mia Farrow in

Rosemary’s Baby,

1968


¢

(UE

PIP ER

VV

Sai

SA Die SRE

BiB

Gh ERR

iO:

Y.

343

official in full Hollywood-star attire. It was a charming cocktail
hour, everyone got along beautifully, and Bacall was permitted to
knock down all the bricks she wished.
Then there were the Lennons. Not all Dakota residents were
thrilled, it seems, to have John and Yoko as neighbors—especially since their presence meant a constant pack of photographers lurking around the building waiting to get a photo of the
famous couple. Nor were the Dakota’s telephone operators back
in those days pleased with the fact that they would have to handle a good thirty calls a day from fans asking to be put through
to the famous former Beatle and/or his wife. Needless to say, the
whole building was saddened and horrified by Lennon’s murder
outside the Dakota on December 8, 1980.
At the time of the murder, many Americans were already familiar with the Dakota because of the famous thriller, Rosemary’s Baby, which had been shot there twelve years earlier.
Movie lovers may also remember the Dakota from its appear-

ance in Twentieth Century—Fox’s 1949 film House of Strangers,
which starred Edward G. Robinson, Richard Conte, and Susan
Hayward. More recently it housed Tom Cruise in the psychological thriller Vanilla Sky (2001).
11. THE
135

LANGHAM
Central

Park

West

Built in 1905, this Central Park West chateau has furnished luxurious living space to Cyril Ritchard, Lee Strasberg, Merv
Griffin, Carly Simon, Maureen O’Sullivan, and Mia Farrow
(Miss O’Sullivan’s daughter). When Woody Allen starred both
Mia and her mom in his 1986 Hannah and Her Sisters, he added
a bit of Central Park West cinéma vérité by featuring Farrow’s
Langham apartment in the film as well. Mia’s eleven-room flat
was a rental, by the way—and in the 1990s, she and her many
children reportedly had to move out when the rent skyrocketed
from a modest $2,300 to $8,000 per month. Back on-screen, the
Langham was where Susan Saint James had to contend with a
very suave Eastern European count named Dracula (George
Hamilton) in Love at First Bite (1979).


344

NEW

12. SAN

REMO

145-146

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

APARTMENTS

Central

Park

West

A longtime favorite address of celebrities, this massive Central
Park West landmark has been home at various times to Dustin
Hoffman, Mary Tyler Moore, Raquel Welch, Bruce Willis, Demi
Moore, Steve Martin, Donald Sutherland, Paul Simon, Barry
Manilow, Elaine May, Tony Randall, Robert Stigwood, Harold

Arlen, and Diane Keaton. When rock star Madonna (she had yet
to reinvent herself as model mother and children’s book author)
tried to buy a $1.2 million co-op apartment in the San Remo in
July 1985, Diane Keaton was the lone member of the prestigious

building’s co-op board who did not reject the singer’s application. The others, it seemed, felt Madonna’s flamboyant lifestyle—
which had included nude layouts in Playboy and Penthouse as
well as a hot-tempered actor fiancé named Sean Penn—would
bring unwanted publicity to the San Remo’s elegant classical entryways. Expecting trouble with the board, Madonna showed up
for her personal appearance dressed in a basic black dress accessorized with a single strand of pearls and two gold crucifixes (she
had yet to discover the Kabbalah) around her neck. But neither
God nor Diane Keaton were enough to get Madonna into the San
Remo. She had better luck down the street at 65 Central Park
West, where she and Sean ultimately wound up living.
On a sadder note, the San Remo is where the legendary screen
goddess of the 1940s, Rita Hayworth, lived out the last years of
her life in the apartment of her daughter by Aly Khan, Princess
Yasmin Khan. A victim of Alzheimer’s disease, Miss Hayworth—
installed in a suite that tried to duplicate the furnishings of her
Beverly Hills home—had nurses round the clock. The single rose
that arrived every day up until her death in 1987 was a gift of
her Gilda costar and longtime friend, Glenn Ford.
13. THE
151

KENILWORTH
Central

Park

West

Notable for its massive columned entryway, the Kenilworth was
completed in 1908. For many years, the movies’ most famous Sherlock Holmes, Basil Rathbone, resided here. Old-time Central Park
Westers recall with amusement seeing Rathbone walking in Central


Pee

IPESRAWEE Sabre Si DIE

RE
B Bere

RR

TO: Rey

345

The Kenilworth

Park with his friend Boris Karloff, who lived three blocks away in
the Dakota. Needless to say, it’s not every day that you run into
Sherlock Holmes ona stroll with Frankenstein! Other Kenilworth
tenants of note have been actors Keir Dullea and Michael Douglas.
14.

THE

211

BERESFORD

Central

Park

West/1

and

7 West

8lst

Street

A building so vast it has three different addresses, the magnificent
Beresford is where Rock Hudson had his six-room home away
from Hollywood. After the star died of AIDS in October 1985,
most of the contents of his Beresford apartment were auctioned
off at the William Doyle Galleries in New York, bringing prices
that far exceeded the auction house’s expectations. Among the
items that fans fought over were a silverplated box inscribed
“Dynasty, 100th episode,” which brought $900; a needlepoint


346

NEW

YORK

THE

MOVIE

LOVERS)

GUIDE

The Beresford

rug made by Rock ($2,100); a Steinway piano ($6,875); and the
footstool that five-foot, four-inch Elizabeth Taylor used to reach
the six-foot, five-inch actor’s Beresford bathroom sink ($1,400).
Other famous former Beresford tenants: John McEnroe and
Tatum O’Neal, Mike Nichols and Diane Sawyer, Calvin Klein,
Beverly Sills, Isaac Stern, Meryl Streep, Peter Jennings, Helen Gurley Brown, Tony Randall, Miramax cochairman Bob Weinstein,
and Jerry Seinfeld. Supposedly, when the comedian renovated his
spacious duplex apartment, the project took several years, which
did not delight his neighbors and resulted in strict new renovation
rules being set by the building’s famously fussy co-op board. These
allow a maximum of ten days for the demolition and no more than
ninety for the heavy work. The same board was less successful
when it fought to stop the American Museum of Natural History
from erecting its new planetarium across the street—it seems they
didn’t like its design and were also concerned about noise. The


THE!

UPPER

WEST

SIDE

SREBER

TERRETORY

347

board was also unable to block a statue honoring Alfred Nobel—
of the famous Nobel Prize—on West 81st Street; they were wor-

ried it would attract too many tourists.
15.

KISSING

JESSICA

61

88th

West

STEIN

APARTMENT

Street

In Kissing Jessica Stein (2001), the writing-acting team of Jennifer
Westfeldt and Heather Juergensen broke new ground with their
poignant, funny look at lesbian love in the city. Westfeldt’s sexually unsettled title character seemingly has everything: good job,
great friends, supportive family, and fabulous digs in a brownstone—with a spiral staircase no less—on the Upper West Side.
The only thing lacking in Jessica’s life is romance. After a string of
failed relationships with men, Jessica answers a “woman seeking
woman” ad and everything changes—for a while.

Kissing Jessica Stein
brownstone


348

16.

NEW

CLAREMONT
175

West

YORK:

RIDING

89th

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

ACADEMY

Street

This four-story horse barn on West 89th Street saw a lot of action
in the 1981 thriller Eyewitness, when William Hurt foiled his

would-be murderer by letting loose scores of horses in the middle
of the Upper West Side. Dating back to 1889, the Claremont Riding Academy has taught riding to the Kennedy kids, the Lawfords, and the children of Diana Ross; it has also rented mounts
for romantic rides through Central Park to such celebrities as
Jacqueline Onassis and writer-editor Michael Korda. In addition
to Eyewitness, movie lovers may also recognize Claremont as the
stable from which a band of Hair hippies stole their ponies for the
“Sodomy” production number in the 1979 Milos Forman film.
Call 212-724-5100,

17. THE
300

ELDORADO
Central

Park

West

Lying between 90th and 91st Streets, this twin-towered 1930s
apartment building is about as far north as you can go on Central
Park West and still claim a fashionable address. Among the stars
who have had such claims are Faye Dunaway, Roddy McDowall,
Richard Dreyfuss, Carrie Fisher, Bianca Jagger, Martin Balsam,
Tuesday Weld, Michael J. Fox and Tracy Pollan, and Phil Donahue and Marlo Thomas. One celebrity who couldn’t wangle an
Eldorado apartment, however, was Lena Horne, who reports that
she and her late husband, Lennie Hayton, who was Jewish, were
once denied a spot in the building. In her autobiography, Lena
(Doubleday, 1965), she writes of her Eldorado experience: “We
were caught in three different kinds of prejudice—against Negroes, against Jews, and against mixed marriages. I don’t know

which of these the management was responding to, but the Eldorado, on Central Park West, refused us an apartment. At the time

it was owned by a Negro, Bishop C. M. (‘Daddy’) Grace.”


THE

18.

UPPER

WEST

THE

ARDSLEY

320

Central

SIDE:

Park

REBEL

West

TERRITORY

349

he

Designed by Emery Roth, the same architect who did the San
Remo down the street, the Art Deco Ardsley is where Barbra
Streisand lived (first with, later without, husband Elliott Gould)
throughout the second half of the 1960s. When, in late 1969,
Ms. Streisand tried moving across Central Park to posher digs in
a cooperative at 1021 Park Avenue, she was turned down by the
building’s board of directors. The building has also been home to
actresses Dianne Wiest and Swoosie Kurtz.
19.

NEEDLE
Broadway

PARK
at 72nd

and

73rd

Streets

Al Pacino’s first starring role was in this raw little 1971 film
about the ravages of drugs—specifically heroin—in the Big Apple. The film was Jerry Schatzberg’s The Panic in Needle Park,

Needle Park, 2004
ea


350

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOV BR

“SeG.UNDE

and its major location was this formerly grungy little park that
pricks Broadway and 72nd Street. Once a hangout for addicts
and pushers, Needle Park, officially Verdi Square (a statue of
composer Giuseppe Verdi stands at its center), has been considerably spiffed up in the last few years as part of the ongoing Yuppification of the Upper West Side and the extensive renovation of
the subway station on the same spot. The film made a star out
of Pacino. Alas, the same cannot be said of his Needle Park
costar Kitty Winn, who also got rave reviews and was judged
Best Actress at the 1971 Cannes Film Festival, but who disappeared from the screen by the end of the decade.
20.

THE

ANSONIA

2107-2109

Broadway

Loaded with towers, mansard roofs, ornate balconies, balustrades, and bay windows, the Ansonia is easily Broadway’s most

opulent, if not its most beautiful, structure. When it opened in
1903, this extraordinary sixteen-story Beaux Arts building provided tenants with such luxuries as electric stoves, hot and cold
filtered water, freezers, a pneumatic-tube system to deliver messages, and even an early form of central air-conditioning. The
building also had incredibly thick walls, installed to protect
against fire, which meant that Ansonia suites were among the
most soundproof in the city. For this reason, it is said, many famous musicians took up residence in the building, including Enrico Caruso, Lauritz Melchior, Igor Stravinsky, Arturo Toscanini,
Ezio Pinza, and Lily Pons. Besides their musical careers, Pinza

and Pons both appeared in the 1947 film Carnegie Hall, as well
as in various other Hollywood films. Another legendary film
personality who once lived at the Ansonia is Billie Burke of The
Wizard of Oz and Topper fame. During her Ansonia days, she
was married to the great theatrical impresario Florenz Ziegfeld,
who lived with Miss Burke on one floor of the building and supposedly kept a mistress in an identical apartment on another!
In addition to its famous residents, the Ansonia has been a

star in its own right on numerous occasions. In the 1975 film The
Sunshine Boys, it was Walter Matthau’s Manhattan apartment
house. That same year the building also served as the location for
a dramatic sequence in Three Days of the Condor that finds


ae

UPPER

WEST.

SIDE:

SREBEE

TE RRETOIRY

391

Beaux Arts beauty:

_

The Ansonia

Robert Redford narrowly escaping being gunned down in the
Ansonia’s alleyway. The Ansonia surprisingly winds up in the
1989 French film Life and Nothing But, which deals with people
looking for their loved ones after World War I. In the film a
French war widow doesn’t find her husband’s body on the battlefields of Verdun but she does meet an officer with whom she
has a relationship. She ultimately leaves France sans officer and
toward the end of the film she is seen reading a letter from him
in an apartment in the Ansonia. In the thriller Single White Female (1992), Bridget Fonda is getting over a bad-news boyfriend
when she takes in a roommate (Jennifer Jason Leigh) in her Ansonia flat. More bad news! And recently, Brittany Murphy had a
funky red suite at the Ansonia, which was filled with the guitars
of her late rock-star dad in Uptown Girls (2003).
The Ansonia was also the spot where a now-famous singer
and movie star got her big break in show business. The star was
Bette Midler, who became the toast of New York when she sang,


352

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

EOVERSG

UIDE

danced, and clowned at the Continental Baths, a gay spa that
once occupied the Ansonia’s basement and whose cabaret room
enjoyed a brief vogue among both gay and straight New Yorkers
in the early 1970s. The Continental Baths were replaced by
Plato’s Retreat, a hedonistic heterosexual follow-up that Spike
Lee re-created in Summer of Sam (1999) for a scene where John
Leguizamo and movie wife Mira Sorvino behave dreadfully, signaling the disintegration of their marriage.
Today the Continental Baths and Plato’s Retreat are history,
but a gloriously restored Ansonia is one of the Upper West Side’s
brightest stars.
21.

BEACON
2124

THEATER

Broadway

Its architect, Walter W. Ahlschlager, was the same man responsible for designing the legendary Roxy Theater, which stood at
Seventh Avenue and 50th Street. This was no coincidence, since
the Beacon Theater was originally conceived as one of a citywide
chain of smaller Roxy theaters, all under the direction of Samuel
L. (“Roxy”) Rothapfel, the entrepreneur who aside from giving
New York City some of its most famous movie palaces also gave
the world the name “Roxy.” Roxy’s chain of theaters never got
off the ground, however, because by the late 1920s he had
started working for William Fox, who wanted him to concentrate on Fox’s own enormous national network of movie houses.
Since Roxy had gone over to Fox while the Beacon was under
construction, it never opened with his name on it, but when it debuted in 1929 as Warner’s Beacon, the theater was still essentially
the house that Roxy wanted built, and it reflected his grandiose
taste and style. Its ornate lobby, for example, had a rotunda that
was a scaled-down version of the one that Ahlschlager had designed for the original Roxy’s grand foyer. Today, that lobby remains pretty much intact, as does its auditorium, which dazzles
with glorious murals, a huge Art Deco chandelier, colossal gilded
statues flanking the proscenium, and a fully playable Wurlitzer
organ. Films haven’t been shown in the fabulous old movie palace
since 1974, but the space has been beautifully restored and now
reigns as a popular venue for soul, rap, R&B, and rock concerts.


iii

UPPER

WIEST

SIDES

22.

DEATH

WISH

APARTMENT

33

Riverside

RES Ble TERR

hor

yY

353

Drive

Despite his posh Riverside Drive address, Charles Bronson could
not isolate himself from the dangers and violence that were a
frightening reality in New York City—especially in the crimeridden 1970s. When businessman Bronson’s wife is murdered
and his daughter raped by three intruders, Bronson not only gets
angry, he gets even by waging his own personal one-man war
against Manhattan’s mugger population. The controversial film
tapped into the helplessness felt by many Americans in the face
of urban crime as well as their seething anger. A big box-office
hit, Death Wish (1974) spawned four sequels.
23.

APTHORP
2207

APARTMENTS

Broadway

With its iron gates, its monumental tunnel-like entrances, and its
impressive interior courtyard, the Apthorp is one of the city’s
most dramatic, and most frequently photographed, apartment
buildings. In Heartburn (1986), when Meryl Streep escapes from
her marital problems in Washington, she finds refuge in her fa-

Courtyard classic: The Apthorp


»

354

NEW!

YORK

THE IMOV NERDOMER-“seGWi

DE

ther’s Apthorp apartment in New York. (In real life, Heartburn’s
author, Nora Ephron, is a former Apthorp resident.) The Apthorp also turns up in Network (1976) as the love nest shared
by TV execs William Holden and Faye Dunaway. On the other
hand, in Eyewitness (1981) it is a TV newscaster

(Sigourney

Weaver) who resides in the landmark 1908 building. Other
Apthorp feature-film credits include The Cotton Club (1984),
where mobster “Dutch” Schultz keeps his moll, Diane Lane, in
grand style at the Apthorp; as well as The Changeling (1978),
The Money Pit (1986), and When Harry Met Sally (1989).

In real life, the Apthorp’s tenant roster has boasted Lena
Horne, Rosie O’Donnell, Conan O’Brien, Steve Kroft, Cyndi
Lauper, and Kate Nelligan. All apartments in the building look
out over the magnificent courtyard.
24.

WILL
155

& GRACE
Riverside

APARTMENT
Drive

Since 1998, Will Truman and Grace Adler have shared a stylish
apartment with a terrace overlooking the Hudson in this building on leafy Riverside Drive. Truman is a successful lawyer, who

Upper West Siders: Debra
Messing and Eric McCormack
of TV’s Will & Grace


TPHEVUP PER? WES

SIDE

SREB EE

TER Ritmo RY

S55

Will & Grace
"=,

apartment building

happens to be gay, and Adler is a much in-demand interior decorator, who happens to be straight. Together they share not only
a wonderful friendship, unencumbered by sex, but a pretty successful TV series—Will & Grace—as well. Granted, Grace did
move out for a season, when she married Harry Connick Jr. in
2002, but the marriage didn’t last and by 2003 she was back on
Riverside Drive. Also residing at number 155 is their struggling
actor friend Jack McFarland (Sean Hayes).
25.

POMANDER
260-266

WALK

West

95th

Street

One of the Upper West Side’s best-kept secrets, this tiny Tudor
village tucked between Broadway and West End Avenue was
built in 1921 to resemble the set of a hit play of the era called
Pomander Walk. Among the showbiz people who have lived in
Pomander Walk’s cottages are Humphrey Bogart, Rosalind Russell, and Lillian and Dorothy Gish. In 1986 Woody Allen let film
audiences see this enchanting Manhattan hideaway in Hannah


*

356

NEW

eYOiRIKe

SRE

MOVIE IoOY ERS

WGiU DIE

Cottage colony:

Pomander Walk

and Her Sisters. While Sam Waterston has no trouble escorting
Dianne Wiest and Carrie Fisher through this private compound,
movie lovers who visit Pomander Walk should be aware that its
steel gates are often locked. Even so, a peek through the bars is
still quite satisfying. In 2004, a two-bedroom Pomander Walk
cottage sold for $840,000.
26.

RIVERSIDE
96th

Street

PARK
at

PLAYGROUND

Riverside

Drive

For five nights during the long hot summer of 1978, Riverside
Park’s 96th Street playground saw more filmmaking than residents of the apartment buildings across the way ever wished to
see again. The film was Walter Hill’s cult classic Warriors, which

depicted the freaky odyssey of a Brooklyn street gang fighting its
way across Manhattan to its home turf on the other side of the
East River. For the opening sequence of Warriors, close to a


THEVUP

PER? WEST

SDE:

IRIEB EL

TERRITORY

SOW,

thousand dress extras were recruited to play the delegates to a
massive convocation of all the street gangs in New York. Since
the Screen Actors Guild permits nonunion actors to be hired to
fill in crowd scenes that require over eighty-five people, the bulk
of the extras were recruited from the streets, lured to the shoot
by the promise of $30 plus two box lunches a night. At first it
was fun, but as the nights wore on, the glamour of filmmaking
wore thin for some of the background players (a number of
whom, it turned out, were gang members in real life!). There
were food fights, fist fights, and cases of disappearing actors, disappearing costumes, and disappearing equipment. When. it
looked as if Warriors might have a real gang war on its hands,
the producers tried raffling off color television sets to calm everyone down. To add to the nightmare, the apartment dwellers
across the park—angered by the noise and bright lights, which,
on some nights, didn’t let up until five in the morning—often interrupted the shooting with jeers and protests. Sometimes things
go better on a back lot.
When director, star, and producer Barbra Streisand hit Riverside Drive in the mid-1990s for a night scene in her The Mirror

Panic in Riverside Park: Warriors, 1978
EI


*

358

NEW

YO RiKs

She”

MOV

TE

LOW E-ReS

GO

Dre

Has Two Faces (1996), supposedly the neighbors again were not
pleased with the noise, lights, and commotion. Reportedly, too,
La Streisand, wearing her director’s hat, had her own noise is-

sues, what with all the airplanes making their final approach to
nearby La Guardia Airport. In fact, she is said to have had a production assistant contact the airport to get them to change the
evening’s flight path to accommodate her shoot. Request denied.
Other films to use the park, supposedly without major incident, were the first Death Wish (1974), which saw a revengebent Charles Bronson zap his first mugger there, and Small Time
Crooks (2000).
27.

METRO

THEATER

Broadway

and

99th

Street

This jewel of a neighborhood movie house was called the Midtown when it opened “uptown” on Broadway and 99th Street in
1933. Over the years it has featured everything from second-runs
to porn to Japanese films to revivals. Now restored and twinned,
the Metro is currently showing first-run films. The theater’s
glazed terra-cotta Art Deco facade has been officially landmarked, and its neon marquee is a beauty, too. No wonder
Woody Allen used the Metro as a location in Hannah and Her
Sisters (1986).
Call 212-222-1200.

28.

HUMPHREY
245

West

BOGART
103rd

HOUSE

Street

This unimpressive four-story row house on the Upper West Side is
where movie idol Humphrey DeForest Bogart was born in 1899,
and where he lived off and on until he was in his early twenties.
His father, Dr. Belmont DeForest Bogart, a respected surgeon, had
his office on the ground floor, his mother, Maude Humphrey Bogart, was a magazine illustrator, and often worked out of a studio
on the third floor, where little Humphrey also had his bedroom.
Completing the family portrait were Humphrey’s two sisters.
Unlike many of the tough-guy characters he would later play


¢

DHESUPRERY

WESTSIDE:

sREB Ee

TeR Rit ORY

S99

on screen, Humphrey Bogart enjoyed a pleasant childhood on
what was then a very upper-middle-class Upper West Side. Sent
to fashionable private schools, the young Bogart attended Trinity School at 91st Street and Amsterdam Avenue from 1913 to
1917, where his best subject was religion. He then went to
Andover in Massachusetts, as his father had done before him.
Unlike his father, however, young Bogart was expelled for disciplinary problems. After that, he joined the Navy, and upon returning to New York and to 245 West 103rd Street, drifted into
the theater. It wasn’t until Bogie was in his mid-twenties and
starting to get small parts on stage that he finally left home and
moved downtown to 43 East 25th Street. There he lived with
actress Helen Menken, who became the first of the three wives
he had prior to marrying Lauren Bacall in 1945.
By 1933, the elder Bogarts had left the family home as well.
Owing to financial problems brought on by the Depression, they
were forced to sell the house on 103rd Street and move to a small
rental apartment in Tudor City. Soon, however, they would have
nothing to worry about financially, because in 1936 their son
would play a gangster in a film called The Petrified Forest, and
he would become one of Hollywood’s biggest stars. Today, the
Upper West Side home where that star got his start in the world
still stands.
29.

MARION
331

DAVIES

Riverside

MANSION

Drive

In 1918 fifty-five-year-old William Randolph Hearst got serious
about turning his twenty-year-old showgirl mistress, Marion
Davies, into a full-fledged movie star. Not only did Hearst establish Cosmopolitan Studios to produce Miss Davies’s films, he
moved Marion, her mother, her sisters, and various other family
members into an opulent French chateau at the corner of Riverside Drive and 105th Street. Hearst saw to it that Marion’s new
abode was nothing less than a palace fit for a movie queen—especially since the queen would frequently be receiving the press
on the premises. Marion’s interviews were usually scheduled to
take place in her private sitting room, which was decorated with
a marble fountain and statues of cupids. Bejeweled and coiffed,


*

360

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

"GUIDE

the young star would appear in a shimmery pink or white negligee if the reporter were a woman, or turn up ina chic suit if
he were a man. Everything was very carefully controlled and
mapped out and, unlike Orson Welles’s fictionalized version of
the Hearst-Davies relationship in his 1941 film Citizen Kane,
Hearst’s plot to make his mistress a star ultimately was a stunning success. Her first features, while pulling in mixed reviews
from the non-Hearst press, were popular with the public, and
Marion Davies had developed into a fine screen comedian by the
early 1920s. It was also at this time that Hearst decided that the
future of feature films lay in Hollywood and so, just as quickly
as he had moved Marion and family to Riverside Drive, he
whisked them off to California, where he found them equally
palatial quarters on Lexington Road in Beverly Hills.
Today, Marion’s former Manhattan mansion belongs to a
Buddhist sect, and movie lovers who visit the site will find a huge
statue of Shinran-Shonin, the founder of the sect, looming in
front of the shrine next door.
SSS

Ee

SS

TE

TE

At home on Riverside
Drive: Marion Davies

SS


THER

PERe WEST

slDE

RE BEE

TERRE
O RY

361

| Keeping the Faith: Church of
the Ascension

30.

CHURCH

OF

221

107th

West

THE

ASCENSION
Street

Actor Edward Norton directed and starred in Keeping the Faith
(2000), a romantic comedy that followed the complications of
two boyhood friends in love with the same woman, another
childhood friend who comes back into their adult lives. Further
complicating the triangle is the fact that Norton is a Catholic
priest and his best friend (Ben Stiller) is a rabbi. For the film,
Norton reportedly chose the Church of the Ascension, which
was also used in Big Night (1995), not just for its beautiful
Gothic interior, but because it was in a working-class, mostly
Latino neighborhood, which fit with his conception of his character as someone working closely with different ethnic groups
and trying to make positive changes in the community. For Ben
Stiller’s temple, director Norton went with the B’nai Jeshrun Synagogue, twenty blocks south at 267 West 86th Street. Norton is
said to have particularly liked its exotic Byzantine/Romanesque

interior, fashionable for well-to-do temples, when it was built
back in 1918.


4
‘toCloisters/
Fort Tryon Park

—Avenue
Amsterdam

17 Jumel Terrace
=r

15
Oe

163%
SOS

Hudeon
River

2 SS
BLE
Frederick
Blvd.

oe

|warded
Avenue.
7.

* . aI a

Parke
-

\\

2

Avenue
Lenox

Powell
Jr.
Blvd.
Adam
Clayton

toFiWoche
Site

iq

.

Garvey Park

B

deathtd|

=

3

z2

Z

=S

is

23g
© 2004 Jeffrey L. Watd

vad

:

[ 3sSe |
=

§
=

=

toMetropolitan Hospital
