Queens: The Return of the Movies

Two decades ago, the borough of Queens was the site of one
of the most important developments in New York film history:
the renovation and reopening of the Astoria Studios. Representing the renaissance of feature-filmmaking in New York, this reborn 1920 studio was soon joined by another important Queens
moviemaking complex—Silvercup Studios—which has been home
not just to feature films but TV hits like Sex and the City and The
Sopranos. If all this wasn’t exciting enough, Queens in 1988 saw
the debut of the American Museum of the Moving Image, the
country’s first museum devoted exclusively to the art and industry of filmmaking.
For those who can tear themselves away from this exciting
Queens museum, the borough has other attractions—from the
longtime home of the great jazzman and sometime film star
Louis Armstrong (now a museum) to the place where commercial television was launched to the community of Bayside, which
in the early part of the last century was a movie colony where
New York moguls and stars spent their summers. These days,
Bayside is a quiet little suburban community—but who knows,
with the comeback of Astoria, perhaps Bayside will regain its
former cachet? And it’s a lot closer than the Hamptons.

Long leland
Sound

Manhattan
sgl

\

Bar

° 3 poo

lunne

7 Corona

Island

7 ow
) Mitown ©
>

¥ LaGuardia Airport

Long Island Egat stu

xg

ows

agg Flushing
Meadows Park

:

Me
~

13
Glendale
514

MS

vow Gardens
12

Hollis. \
15

“A

‘tow
Gembieries \\

Brooklyn

;
y

é

Jameita

A
>

.

16° JFK Airport
5.
®

|

/

=

\
&

$8

—“<&

Bay

§
Far
syRockaway

© 2004 Jeffrey L. Ward

QUEENS:

*uhib

RET URN

OFT

1. KAUFMAN

ASTORIA

STUDIOS

34-12

Street

36th

HE

=MIOV ES

435

'

Of all the links that modern New York has with its proud
moviemaking past, this great studio today stands as one of the
most visible and most vital. The Astoria Studios were founded in
1920 by Jesse Lasky and Adolph Zukor in order to centralize the
production facilities of their Famous Players-Lasky Corporation
(known as Paramount Pictures by 1927), which at the time had
studios scattered all over New York. Throughout the 1920s and
well into the 1930s, Astoria would reign as the most important
film studio on the East Coast.
Known as the Big House to the old-timers who worked there,
the original studio encompassed thirteen acres of an industrial
area of Queens that had been opened up by the building of the
59th Street Bridge in 1909 and the elevated subway in 1917.
As befitted a proper movie factory, Astoria had a dramatic
columned entrance, a huge main stage as well as numerous

REZ:

ee

{

‘ @

:

yd

fess

Astoria’s back lot, dressed for The Battle of Paris, 1929

436

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

smaller ones, a back lot, scene shop, and commissary, not to
mention lavish suites and dressing rooms for its stars.

Among those stars were such legends as Gloria Swanson, who
disliked Hollywood’s provincialism and who in 1923 decreed to
her Paramount bosses that she would work only at Astoria. Since
Swanson was the biggest thing in pictures at the time, she got her
way—as well as the most glamorous star quarters on the lot,
where her enormous closetsful of shoes were the talk of New
York.
Another legendary Astoria star of the 1920s was the screen’s
ultimate male sex symbol, Rudolph Valentino, who made Monsieur Beaucaire and A Sainted Devil at Astoria in 1924 so that
he could have more artistic control over his films than the Hollywood studio system permitted. When the news broke that
Rudy was coming East, it is said that Astoria real-estate agents
were deluged with women seeking apartments near where their
idol would be working.

Last tango in Astoria:

Rudolph Valentino in

A Sainted Devil, 1924

s

GIVE EIN'S:

Sanwa OR Ee RING Ole

HhERMC

VINES

437

Besides Valentino and Swanson, other notable names from
Astoria’s silent era were Billie Burke, May McAvoy, Richard
Barthelmess, Elsie Ferguson, Wallace Reid, Nita Naldi, Louise
Brooks, Bessie Love, Adolphe Menjou, Bebe Daniels, Richard
Dix, Thomas Meighan, Rod La Rocque, W. C. Fields, Gilda
Gray, and William Powell. Among the studio’s top directors were
Allan Dwan, Robert Vignola, Sidney Olcott, as well as D. W.
Griffith, who in 1924 had run into financial difficulties as an independent producer and had made a deal with Adolph Zukor to
work at Astoria. Griffith’s first Astoria production, Sally of the
Sawdust, introduced W. C. Fields to movie audiences.
The year 1927 marked the end of Astoria’s silent era, and indeed looked like the end of Astoria as well, since Paramount’s
production head, B. P. Schulberg, had managed to convince the
studio’s top brass to close their Queens operation and center all
feature production in California. Schulberg hadn’t counted on
the impact of the talkies, however, and when it looked as though
they were around to stay, Paramount reopened Astoria in 1928
to capitalize on Broadway plays and Broadway actors. The great
names of Astoria’s talkie days include: the Marx Brothers, who
did The Cocoanuts and Animal Crackers at Astoria in 1929 and
1930, respectively; Tallulah Bankhead, noted more for her milk
baths than for the quality of her films; Ginger Rogers, who made
her screen debut with brown hair and the line “Cigarette me, big
boy!”; Claudette Colbert, who filmed many of her pictures both
in English and in French; Nancy Carroll, considered to be the
first star created by the talkies; and Clive Brook, the first Sherlock Holmes of the sound era.
Despite Astoria’s sound revival, by 1932 Paramount was having financial difficulties on both coasts. Facing bankruptcy, it
therefore again decided to shoot all of its features in Hollywood.
It was at this time, too, that one of the company’s creditors, the

Western Electric Company, took charge of Astoria and changed
its name to Eastern Services Studios. With its new management
and new name, Astoria remained a major filmmaking facility on

the East Coast and still kept strong ties with Paramount, as is
evidenced by the fact that Paramount’s newsreel division—“the
Eyes and Ears of the World”—continued to be based here.
During the 1930s, Astoria/Eastern Services Studios specialized in

438

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

short subjects, and many of these brought to the screen such
New York-based talents as George Burns and Gracie Allen, Jack
Benny, Milton Berle, Bob Hope, and Danny Kaye. In the 1930s
Astoria was often used for projects that Hollywood wouldn’t
touch, such as The Emperor Jones (1933), which starred the
great black actor Paul Robeson. Finally, Astoria in the 1930s was
where many promising New York performers made their screen
tests. Among this group of Hollywood hopefuls was Fred Astaire. Of his Astoria test, the West Coast casting people noted:
“Can’t act. Slightly bald. Can dance alittle.”
By the late 1930s, activity at Astoria had slowed down considerably, and Hollywood was definitely the motion-picture capital of the nation and of the world. With World War II, however,
Astoria suddenly found itself back in action in a big way, when
it was taken over by the U.S. Army and turned into the U.S.
Signal Corps Photographic Center for the production of training
and propaganda films. After the war, the army stayed on at
Astoria and shot, among many projects, its television series The
Big Picture.
In 1971, the army got out of the motion-picture business, and
for the next few years the future of Astoria was dicey. Although
the government gave the studio to the City University of New
York in 1973, plans to turn it into a college campus and/or a film
school were never realized. Indeed, by the mid-1970s it looked
as if the property would have to be turned back over to the federal government, which might then have auctioned it off as surplus real estate, thus spelling the end of Astoria as a film studio.
Seeing its historic significance and its potential role in the resurgence of filmmaking that was taking place in the city at the time,
a group of New York film people formed a foundation in 1976
that not only managed to get the Astoria Studios declared a National Historic Landmark, but that also got the facility restored
and back in operation.
Today’s Astoria Studios—further expanded and modernized in
1983 and renamed Kaufman Astoria Studios by real-estate developer George S. Kaufman—boasts the country’s largest soundstage outside Hollywood, plus six smaller stages (a brand-new
one just added in 2004), and a recording studio big enough for
a symphony orchestra. In addition, there are scenery rooms,

s

QUEENS:

thE

RE

WRING OiFe

7 MERMIOV

WES

439

Rudolph Valentino and cast of Monsieur Beaucaire lunching in Astoria
Studios commissary, 1924

equipment-rental operations, production offices, health club, tennis court, bank, and commissary (which is open to the public).
Today’s KAS also boasts The Wiz (1978), All That Jazz (1979),
Going in Style (1979), Arthur (1981), Fort Apache, the Bronx
(1981), Wolfen (1981), The World According to Garp (1982),
The Verdict (1982), Daniel (1983), The Money Pit (1986),
Brighton Beach Memoirs (1986), Ishtar (1987), Radio Days
(1987), The Secret of My Success (1987), The Glass Menagerie
(1987), Orphans (1987), September (1987), Presumed Innocent
(1990), Alice (1990), Scenes from a Mall (1991), Scent of a
Woman (1992), Shadows and Fog (1992), Glengarry Glen Ross
(1992), The Age of Innocence (1993), Carlito’s Way (1993), The
Preacher’s Wife (1996), Ransom (1996), The First Wives Club
(1996), The Devil’s Own (1997), The Devil’s Advocate (1997),
Great Expectations (1998), A Perfect Murder (1998), Cruel Intentions (1999), Man on the Moon (1999), Hollywood Ending
(2002), and The Stepford Wives (2004). All of these films were

NEW

440

THE

YORK:

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

produced wholly or partially at Astoria. As for television, the studio has been home to The Cosby Show, Sesame Street, 100 Cen-

tre Street, and Whoopi, to name a few. With so much production,
KAS is currently expanding. Those pioneers Jesse Lasky and
Adolph Zukor must be quite proud, wherever they are.
Visit www.kaufmanastoria.com.

For information on the Studio Cafe,

call 718-392-5600.

2. AMERICAN
35th

Avenue

MUSEUM
at

36th

OF

THE

MOVING

IMAGE

Street

While there are no tours of Kaufman Astoria Studios for the general public, movie lovers who venture out to Queens to see the
studios can get an insider’s view of the history and technology of
moviemaking at the American Museum of the Moving Image,
which opened in 1988 in a former studio building on the Astoria lot. The nation’s first museum dedicated solely to the art and
artifice of film, television, video, and digital media, AMMI

ex-

Mae West working the concessions stand at “Tut’s Fever,” fantasy movie

house created by artists Red Grooms and Lysiane Luong for the
American

Museum of the Moving Image, Astoria

QUIEEIN
S'? SEhiEOR

ET URN

G:F

T HE

TMIOVILES

44]

hibits historic and contemporary props, set models and sketches,
posters, lobby cards, annotated scripts, production photos, and
equipment. This is a place where movie lovers can marvel at
everything from the earliest Edison camera to Valentino’s French
court costumes for Monsieur Beaucaire (shot next door) to the

desk used by Tom Brokaw on NBC News Tonight.
AMMI does more than just display movie and TV memorabilia, however; it has a number of hands-on exhibits that focus on
editing, animation, and sound effects. These include computerbased interactive experiences as well as a working soundstage
where visitors can shoot their own scenes.
A 200-seat movie theater and three screening rooms are also
part of the AMMI picture, presenting adventurous programs of
silents, classic and contemporary sound films, plus avant-garde
film, video, and digital art. Special mini-festivals focus on famous
directors like Bernardo Bertolucci, Stephen Frears, and Lars Von
Trier as well as on esoteric themes like the evolution of widescreen cinema. All in all, over four hundred films are screened
here every year, with many featuring personal appearances by
filmmakers and actors involved with the productions.
For program information, call 718-784-0077, or visit
www.ammi.org.

3. SILVERCUP
42-22

22nd

STUDIOS
Street

Further evidence of the dramatic rise of film production in New
York, the former Silvercup Bakery in Long Island City (whose
trademark sign can still be seen across the East River from Manhattan) was turned into a movie studio in 1983. Originally specializing in commercials and music videos (Madonna, Britney Spears,
Janet Jackson, Bon Jovi, Billy Joel, Cyndi Lauper, and Billy Idol
have all shot here), Silvercup studios currently has thirteen soundstages within its enormous three-block-long building plus five
drive-in studios. The studios’ most famous recent tenants have
been the HBO TV series Sex and the City and The Sopranos.
On the feature front, Silvercup has provided studio space
for such made-in-New York films as Broadway Danny Rose
(1984), Garbo Talks (1984), Romancing the Stone (1984), Com-

442

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Silvercup sirens

(clockwise, from top):
Sex and the City stars

Sarah Jessica Parker,
Cynthia Nixon,
Kim Cattrall, and

Kristin Davis

promising Positions (1985), The Purple Rose of Cairo (1985),

Heartbreak House (1985), Highlander (1986), Street Smart
(1986), Three Men and a Baby (1987), Crocodile Dundee II
(1988), Working Girl (1988), When Harry Met Sally (1989), Do
the Right Thing (1989), Black Rain (1989), Sea of Love (1989),
Bird on a Wire (1990), Godfather III (1990), First Knight
(1995), Sabrina (1995), Ransom (1996), City Hall (1996), Extreme Measures (1996), Addicted to Love (1997), Men in Black
(1997), Private Parts (1997), Mickey Blue Eyes (1999), Music of
the Heart (1999), Stuart Little 2 (2002), Mr. Deeds (2002),
Changing Lanes (2002), and Two Weeks Notice (2002).
With its continuing success, Silvercup is now expanding with

an adjacent two-million-square-foot mixed-use complex of retail
stores, residences, and, naturally, more studios and production

facilities. For the project, which covers six and a half acres just
south of the Queensboro/59th Street Bridge, Silvercup has engaged world-class British architect Richard Rogers.
Visit www.silvercupstudios.com.

QUEENS:

SME

4. QUEENS

REamwWwRONG

MIDTOWN

OF

tTHiERMO
WVNES

443

TUNNEL

Tunnels are not particularly photogenic, and this underground
link between Queens and Manhattan has never been one of the
city’s major locations—especially since there are so many greatlooking bridges to shoot. A few exceptions have been The Boys
in the Band (1970), one of the country’s first mainstream gay
films, which has one of the main characters driving through the
Midtown Tunnel from Long Island for the birthday party from
hell, around which the story revolves. The artery was also used
in The Devil’s Own (1997), but it was another 1997 film that
permanently put the Queens Midtown Tunnel on movie lovers’
maps. The film was Men in Black and its tunnel scene features
MIB agents Tommy Lee Jones and Will Smith chasing extraterrestrials in a 1987 Ford LTD that makes anything ever driven by
Batman or James Bond look positively primitive. Facing impossible traffic (a frequent occurrence in the Midtown Tunnel), the
Men-in-Blackmobile levitates and flies above the congestion and
straight through the toll booth. The ultimate E-Z Pass!
5. QUEENSBORO/S59TH
Queens

Plaza

to

59th

STREET
Street

BRIDGE
in Manhattan

With its crown-topped finials and intricate steel webbing, this
distinctive 1909 structure was a longtime staple for Hollywood
art directors. Whenever they wished to portray a particularly
grand Upper East Side apartment—such as Rosalind Russell’s in
The Velvet Touch (1948), Barbara Stanwick’s in Sorry, Wrong
Number (1949), and playboy Frank Sinatra’s in The Tender Trap
(1955)—it invariably looked out at the Queensboro Bridge.
Particularly beautiful at night, the bridge—despite its name—became the signature image for Woody Allen’s homage to Manhattan in his 1979 film of the same name, both on screen and on the
poster. Far earlier, the gritty Hollywood film Dead End (1937)
used the bridge to join the two worlds of Depression-era New
York—the poor living in grubby, four-story tenements in the
shadow of the bridge and the glamorous society types residing
well above the squalor in their posh penthouse towers with views
of the bridge in all its glory.
In the last decade, the Queensboro Bridge has continued to be

444

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

glamorous in such films as The Mirror Has Two Faces (1996),
The Last Days of Disco (1998), Celebrity (1998), and Two Weeks

Notice (2002). It’s also provided additional drama in various action films. In Donnie Brasco (1997), for example, there’s a long
tracking shot with Johnny Depp driving over the East River while
his passenger Al Pacino waxes philosophical on the art of the hit.
In Conspiracy Theory (1997), the bridge is the scene of a car
switch whereby Mel Gibson with Julia Roberts in tow foils his
pursuers. Perhaps most memorable is the bridge sequence in New
Jack City (1991), when drug lord Wesley Snipes and a partner-incrime dangle a dude who owes them money by his heels from the
bridge; when he doesn’t pay up, they drop him into the drink.
Onaless violent note, the bridge has a big moment in a very
different sort of film, French director Jacques Perrin’s Oscarnominated documentary on the long-distance voyages of migratory birds, Winged Migration (2001). In the film, Canada geese,
for whom the East River is along their migratory path, fly under
the magnificent span as they head to warmer climes for the winter.
6. ROOSEVELT

ISLAND

TRAM/ROOSEVELT

ISLAND

This skinny 147-acre island lies in the East River off Midtown
Manhattan and Western Queens. Technically part of the borough
of Manhattan, but linked to Queens by a small bridge, it was for
many years called Welfare Island, because of the various hospitals
and sanitariums that were once located here. In the 1970s, work
began to turn the island into a bold new city within New York
City. Today the renamed Roosevelt Island is a quieter, pedestrianfreindly alternative to both Manhattan and Queens. Not terribly
interesting to filmmakers, Roosevelt nonetheless has one attraction that is unique to the metropolitan area—an aerial tramway,
inaugurated in 1976, that takes passengers on a magical amusement park-like ride between Manhattan and the island.
For directors of action-adventure films, the tram was an irresistible new toy. Some of the tram’s star appearances include the
Sylvester Stallone-Billy Dee Williams thriller Nighthawks
(1981), where terrorists hijack the tram, holding hostages until
their demands are met; Die Hard with a Vengence (1995), where
Bruce Willis jumps impossibly from the Queensboro Bridge to

QUEEN'S= WHE SREd URINT Ore

T HIE YM O'ViliES

445

the tram and then onto a barge below in his stunt-filled pursuit
of a mad bomber

(Jeremy Irons); and in Spider-Man

(2002),

where the villainous Willem Dafoe knocks a tram-full of children
off its pulleys, leaving it dangling over the East River until weall-know-who saves the day.
Fans of the film The Professional (1994) may also remember a
much gentler tram sequence in an otherwise unrelentingly violent
film. In the final scene of the picture, we see twelve-year-old Natalie
Portman crossing the East River aboard the tram, as she abandons
her fledgling life of crime for a more conventional existence at
an orphanage called the Spencer School on Roosevelt Island. Just
three hundred feet from Manhattan, her new world seems many
many miles away in spirit. It is the one hopeful image in the film.
7. LOUIS
34-56

ARMSTRONG

MUSEUM

107th

Corona

Street,

From 1943 until his death in 1971, Louis Daniel Armstrong
lived in this attractive red-brick home in Corona, Queens.
Known primarily for his superstar trumpeting, “Satchmo” also
appeared in some two dozen motion pictures, beginning with

Louis Armstrong
now

a museum

house,

446

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Pennies from Heaven in 1936 and ending with Hello, Dolly! in
1969. Today, Armstrong’s former Queens home, a National Historic Landmark, is one of New York City’s newest museums.
Opened to the public in late 2003, the Louis Armstrong Museum
allows visitors to see the house exactly as it was when Armstrong
and his wife, Lucille, lived here. Highlights of the property are
Armstrong’s private den, the couple’s spectacular bathroom with
gold fixtures, a classic 1960s turquoise kitchen, and all sorts
of memorabilia from paintings by Armstrong’s friend Tony Bennett to Armstrong’s gold-plated trumpets, scrapbooks, and photographs.
For information on opening times and prices, call 718-478-8274 or
visit www.satchmo.net.

8. FLUSHING

MEADOW

PARK

Much of it was a garbage dump before it was filled in, graded,
and built upon for the 1939 New York World’s Fair. While some
fair visitors enjoyed riding in shiny new Lincolns along the Ford
Motor Company’s half-mile elevated highway of the future, and
while others marveled at the artificial thunder and lightning generated inside the General Electric pavilion, everyone agreed that
the most impressive wonder at Flushing Meadow was on view at
the Radio Corporation of America Building: television!
It was in RCA’s pavilion—designed to resemble an Art Deco
radio tube—that television made its official commercial debut.
The five- and nine-inch TV sets on display were not just for looking; they were authentic production models that RCA hoped
soon to market all over the country. At the same time, NBC
(RCA’s network) would be providing several hours of scheduled
television programming every day, and soon CBS, not to be outdone, would follow suit.

But while TV was a big hit with the masses at Flushing
Meadow, it was not a hit with the buying public. Not only did
the price tags on those first models—between $199.50 and
$600—amount to big bucks for a small screen at the tail end of
the Depression, there was also the increasingly disturbing world
situation, which meant that Americans had other things on their

QUEENS:

THE

RETURN

SSS

aS

Alien-busters Tommy
Meadow
|S

mf

OF
ES IS

THE

MOVIES

IE

447

ERE SR

ET

Lee Jones and Will Smith at work in Flushing

Park in Men in Black, 1997

SET ESS

LE So REERSomeSSE SR RE

ae SS

RE

aSBEE

ET

minds besides television. In fact, by 1941 there were only ten
thousand TV sets in the entire country, and once the United
States entered the war at the end of that same year, all television
production as well as commercial broadcasts had been discontinued. When the war ended, however, the story of television would
be a very different one. What happened at Flushing Meadow in
1939 was just a sneak preview.
For TV lovers who visit Flushing Meadow Park, little remains
of the 1939 World’s Fair except the old New York City Building,
which is now the Queens Museum. Its main attraction is a wonderful scale model of New York’s five boroughts, which was built
for the 1964 World’s Fair and is continually updated to reflect
the architectural changes in the city. Other vestiges of the 1964
Fair at Flushing Meadow are the 140-foot Unisphere globe—the
fair’s symbol, which can be seen from both the Long Island Expressway and the Grand Central Parkway. Also hard to miss
from the highways skirting Flushing Meadow Park are the futuristic towers of the New York State Pavilion. Adding a surreal
dimension to the skyline, they wound up, appropriately, as part

448

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

of Munchkinland in Sidney Lumet’s 1978 fantasy musical,
The Wiz.
Those same towers as well as the 1964 Unisphere can also be
seen in Men in Black (1997), as the preferred point of entry for

the extraterrestrial aliens overrunning the planet in the fantasy
comedy produced by Steven Spielberg. Men in Black also has
great shots of flying saucers hovering over nearby Shea Stadium
and then crashing into the Unisphere, as the aliens try to make a
fast exit from Earth.
9. BAYSIDE

Enjoying a prized position on Little Neck Bay, the community of
Bayside in northeastern Queens was a fashionable spot for
wealthy New Yorkers to have summer estates in the last decades
of the nineteenth century. Close to the nerve center of Manhattan, yet delightfully peaceful and rural, Bayside was an especially
convenient location for people whose businesses didn’t allow
them the luxury of being too far from the city. When the twenti-

Baysider Nancy Carroll
with Richard Arlen in
Wayward, 1932

¢

QUEENS:

THE

RETURN

OF

THE

MOVIES

449

eth century rolled around, it wasn’t long before a whole new
group of wealthy, hardworking New, Yorkers—the stars and executives of the burgeoning motion-picture industry—discovered
the many charms of the Bayside summer, and during the 1910s
and 1920s they turned the little Queens community into what
may have been the world’s first movie colony. Long before Malibu ... there was Bayside!
One of the grandest of the Bayside film colony’s summer
places was that which producer Joseph Schenck and his moviestar wife, Norma Talmadge, rented from publisher John Ridenour. Ensconced in their hideaway on Little Neck Bay, the
Schencks frequently hosted weekend parties that had some of the
brightest stars of the era sunning, sailing, and playing croquet.
The Schenck compound, it seems, was also a popular spot for
celebrity weddings. In 1920, screenwriters Anita Loos and John
Emerson tied the knot in Joe and Norma’s Bayside garden, and
a year later Norma’s sister, Natalie, married the famous comedian Buster Keaton there as well. Today the historic property has
been seriously subdivided, but the main house with its enormous
driveway can still be seen off 222nd Street between Corbett
Road and Second Place. The guest house—number 35-45 222nd
Street-—was used by Gloria Swanson in the summer of 1923
when she was making her transition from Hollywood movie
queen to Astoria film star.
Around the corner from the Schencks’, W. C. Fields supposedly spent several summers in the split-level frame house at
35-25 223rd Street. Only the back of the place can be seen from
the street; the front, which had direct access to the beach and the
bay in W. C. Fields’s day, is now separated from the shoreline by
the Cross Island Parkway.
Movie lovers can get a good look, however, at the handsome
turreted mansion that was the longtime Bayside home of boxer
James “Gentleman Jim” Corbett at 221-04 Corbett Road. Re-

membered for inventing the left hook and for defeating John L.
Sullivan in a famous match in 1892, Corbett was also the
first celebrity to sign an exclusive contract to appear in motion
pictures. The year was 1894—and the company was the Kinetoscope Exhibition Company, one of the firms involved in marketing Edison’s Kinetoscope motion-picture viewing devices.
Not far from the Corbett property, at 215th Place and 32nd

450

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Avenue, one of the most famous stars of the silent screen had
Bayside’s most spectacular estate. The owner of the property was

Pearl White, queen of the cliff-hanger serials in the 1910s, who
is still remembered as the star of the legendary The Perils of
Pauline. According to one Bayside old-timer, however, in person
Pearl cut quite a different figure from the embattled heroine she
portrayed on-screen. He remembered often seeing the star passing by in a great chauffeur-driven motorcar. If the railroad gates
happened to be down at the Bell Avenue crossing, Miss White
would simply have her chauffeur drive through them, knowing
full well the railroad would bill her for the repairs!
Pearl eventually gave up Bayside and the United States for a
chateau and a continued life of luxury in France. Meanwhile,
theater critic John Golden, for whom Broadway’s Golden Theater is named, bought Miss White’s estate and eventually bequeathed the property to the city to be turned into a public park
upon his death. Today, Golden’s wishes have been followed and
the former Pearl White/John Golden estate is now John Golden
Park. The main house is gone, but the grounds—with gardens,
walkways, park benches, playing fields, and old-fashioned street
lamps—make this one of the prettiest spots in Bayside.
Farther afield, character actress May Robson—noted for playing society matrons in many movies, but who was nominated for
an Academy Award in 1933 for her performance as the bag-ladylike Apple Annie in Frank Capra’s Lady for a Day—lived at

Joseph

Schenck/Norma
Talmadge

Bayside “cottage”

QUEENS?

THE

RETURIN:

©'F

THEM

OVS

451

42-34 209th Street. Across the way, at 43-25 209th Street, Duncan “The Cisco Kid” Renaldo was in residence until his death in
1980. Farther along 209th Street, the Dutch Colonial mansion at
number 42-46 was, in the late 1920s, briefly home to a beautiful,

frequently forgotten star of the early talkies, Nancy Carroll. In
her second film, Abie’s Irish Rose (1928), originally made as a
silent and then turned into a “part-talkie,” Carroll was the first

woman to sing in a commercial feature film. While many careers
were ruined by the talkies, Miss Carroll was considered the first
actress to have been made astar thanks to the new medium.
Nancy Carroll shot her first films at Paramount Studios in
nearby Astoria but, by 1932, she and most of Paramount’s other
East Coast stars had packed their suitcases and steamer trunks
and had taken off for Hollywood, where feature films would be
based for the next couple of decades. The 1930s also saw the end
of Bayside as a film colony, and soon the exclusive community
on Little Neck Bay was swallowed up by Greater New York and
became just another suburb. Meanwhile, out on the West Coast,
Malibu was starting to become very popular.
The Bayside Historical Society periodically gives walking tours that
take in some of the town’s more interesting properties. For
information,

10.

call 718-352-1548.

WESTSIDE
1 Tennis

TENNIS

Place,

CLUB

Forest

Hills

Established in 1802 and one of the country’s most exclusive tennis clubs, this was the site of the prestigious U.S. Open from 1915
until the event moved to the newly built USTA National Center in
Flushing Meadow Park in 1978. For movie lovers, the tennis
match that may interest them most is a Davis Club trial between
the United States and Australia that took place here in 1950, long
shots of which were used to represent a match in Hitchcock’s
classic Strangers on a Train, where tennis player Farley Granger
plays against time, while two police officers are waiting to pick
him up for supposedly murdering his estranged wife. The film
was based on one of Patricia Highsmith’s first novels; another
book of Highsmith’s, The Talented Mr. Ripley, would have two

NEW

452

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Playing against time:
Farley Granger at Forest

Hills in Strangers ona
Train, 1950

screen incarnations: Purple Noon (1961), a French film directed
by René Clement that starred Alain Delon, and Anthony

Minghella’s 1999 feature that used the novel’s actual title and
starred Matt Damon as Tom Ripley. Highsmith’s sequel to her
first Mr. Ripley, Ripley’s Game, also inspired two big-screen versions: German avant-garde director Wim Wenders’s The American Friend (1977) and Liliana Cavani’s 2002 film, which used the

original title of the novel and starred John Malkovich.
Back in Forest Hills, the classy Westside Tennis Club—which
has thirty-eight courts, eight of which are grass—also pops up in
The Royal Tenenbaums (1999), for a sequence with Luke Wilson
as the former professional tennis player Tenenbaum son.
11. WILL
124

ROGERS
81st

HOUSE

Avenue

In the early 1920s, actor/humorist Will Rogers lived with his
family in this stately Tudor mansion in Kew Gardens. At the time
Rogers was often a headliner in the Ziegfeld Follies on Broadway. By the end of the decade, however, he would have great suc-

QUEENS:

THE,

RETURN

OF

THE

MOVIES

453

cess in talking pictures and would move permanently to the West
Coast, where he wound up living on a vast ranch near the Pacific
Ocean. Today, his L.A. estate has become the Will Rogers State
Park and is a popular attraction for locals and tourists. Meanwhile, the world has forgotten that Rogers once lived in Queens.
12. CHARLIE
105

CHAPLIN

Mowbray

HOUSE

Place

Although Chaplin made most of his feature films on the West
Coast, at his own studio on La Brea Avenue in Hollywood, the
great silent-picture star is said to have acquired this modest Kew
Gardens brick bungalow in 1919 to use when his business as
producer, writer, and star brought him east.
13. ALL

IN

89-66

THE
to

FAMILY

89-88

BLOCK

Cooper

Avenue

ABC had backed two separate pilots of All in the Family, but in
each case had dropped the project. Ultimately, a television series
in which the main character was a raving bigot was just too con-

nos

neneseononinntatiss

All in the Family block, Glendale
CC) a

a

a

NEW

454

THE

YORK:

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

troversial for American TV audiences in 1969—despite the fact
that the British series on which All in the Family was based (Till
Death Do Us Part) had been extremely successful in the United
Kingdom. Indeed, when Norman Lear finally got CBS to take a
chance on the project, it was with little enthusiasm that the network put the show on the air. Much to everyone’s surprise, All
in the Family was an instant hit, and it spawned a rash of sitcoms
that dealt with formerly taboo-on-TV subjects like race, abortion, premarital sex, homosexuality, and impotence. All in the
Family also gave birth to the phenomenon of the spinoff, which
started when Edith Bunker’s cousin Maude segued into her own
eponymous series, and was followed by the Bunkers’ AfricanAmerican neighbors becoming the prime-time Jeffersons—not to
mention Maude’s maid, who went off to have her own Good
Times.

Although the series was taped in California, All in the Family
supposedly took place in a conservative neighborhood in
Queens. For the show’s credit roll, a real block of middle-class
wood-frame houses on Cooper Avenue between Woodhaven
Boulevard and 88th Street in Glendale, Queens, was used. The
home that was supposedly Archie and Edith’s is thought to have
been number 89-70 Cooper Avenue. Besides the notoriety that
the block gained from its weekly appearances on network TV, it
also found itself in some grizzly newspaper headlines in October
1972, when a woman living at number 89-88 Cooper Avenue
shot her three children and then turned the gun on herself.
14.

MACPELAH
82-30

CEMETERY

Cypress

Hills

Street

The great star of this cemetery is the Incredible Houdini (born
Ehrich Weiss), whose grave just beyond Macpelah’s main gate is
distinguished by a large marble monument topped by a bust of
the famous showman. While the world remembers Harry Houdini for his escape artistry and his feats of magic, it has forgotten that, in the late 1910s and early 1920s, Houdini also
appeared ina series of swashbuckling, daredevil adventure films
that exploited his acrobatic skills and his special-effects expertise. The first of these film projects was a fifteen-part serial called

QUIEEINS SR HE

RETURN

OF

7 HESM

© Viles

455

Grave of escape artist Harry
Houdini (born Ehrich Weiss),

Macpelah Cemetery

The Master Mystery, which Houdini made in 1918 for Octagon
Films at their studio in Yonkers, New York. From there, Houdini
went to Hollywood, and starred in two features for Paramount—Artcraft Pictures, The Grim Game (1919) and Terror Island (1920), and he soon became more interested in making
movies than in doing live performances. So interested that, in
1921, he formed the New York-based Houdini Picture Corporation which, for its first film, came out with The Man from Beyond (1922), featuring Houdini as producer, writer, editor, and
star. It also featured a hair-raising sequence, filmed on location at
Niagara Falls, and the movie met with critical and box-office
success. A year later, however, Houdini didn’t fare quite as well
with Haldane of the Secret Service, in which the fiftyish escape
artist-turned—movie actor couldn’t cut the mustard as a romantic lead. The film failed, and Houdini returned to the stage.
Houdini died of a ruptured appendix suffered in October
1926 while he was performing at the Garrick Theater in Detroit.
The theatrics surrounding his funeral and burial in New York

NEW

456

Spanish Colonial Queens:

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Loew’s Valencia, Hollis

were reminiscent of those that had attended Valentino’s death
just two months earlier. And like Valentino’s grave at the Hollywood Memorial Cemetery on the West Coast (which continues
to draw fans and cultists to this day), Houdini’s tomb at the
Macpelah Cemetery in Queens has also seen its share of bizarre
visitors over the years. Many of these are spiritualists who come
to the Houdini crypt annually on Halloween to commemorate
the many séances held by Houdini’s widow to try to contact her
husband after his death. Unfortunately, vandals have also visited
the Houdini grave from time to time, and on various occasions
have made off with the great magician/movie star’s bust.
15. TABERNACLE
16511

Jamaica

OF

PRAYER

Avenue

Today the discarded crutches of those who have been healed here
hang beneath the two-story vaulted ceiling in the lobby of what
is now the Tabernacle of Prayer. Before being born again as a
house of worship, this Hollis, Queens, landmark was, from 1929
to 1977, the Loew’s Valencia movie house. A dazzling mix of

QUEENS:

THE

RETURN

OF

THE

MOVIES

457

Spanish Colonial and pre-Columbian architecture and decor, the
Valencia had an auditorium that gave moviegoers the illusion
that they were in a lushly planted patio under a moonlit sky.
These days, many of the nude statues that adorned this fantasy
patio have been given wings to make them more in keeping with
the Valencia’s present incarnation.
16.

JOHN

F. KENNEDY

INTERNATIONAL

AIRPORT

Jamaica

In the post-9/11 world, filming at major U.S. airports is extremely difficult, if not impossible. Before the tragedy, however,
numerous films featured sequences at JFK—from The Marrying
Kind (1952), when the airport was called Idlewild, to Dog Day
Afternoon (1975), where the final showdown with the Al Pacino-led bank-robbing kidnappers takes place on the tarmac.
Other pre 9/11 films that have JFK moments are The Gang Who
Couldn’t Shoot Straight (1971), Addicted to Love (1997), The

Tom Hanks and Leonardo DiCaprio in the pedestrian tunnel of Eero
Saarinen-designed TWA terminal at JFK airport in Catch Me /f You Can,

2002
Lee)

458

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Last Days of Disco (1998), and Music of the Heart (1999). One

exception to the post-9/11 embargo on filming was Catch Me If
You Can (2002), which used the striking Eero Saarinen—designed
former Trans World Airlines terminal for the final scene where
con man Frank Abaganale Jr. (Leonardo DiCaprio), impersonating an airline pilot, meets his FBI agent nemesis (Tom Hanks) in
one of the terminal’s distinctive tubular pedestrian tunnels. One
of the reasons the film was able to shoot at the terminal was that
TWA went out of business in October 2001, and abandoned its
landmark JFK base at the same time. Current plans call for the
sleek terminal, which opened in 1962, to be restored and redeveloped by the booming budget carrier Jet Blue.
