Greenwich Village: The Big
Back Lot

Greenwich Village is New York City on a different scale. It is
low-rise; there are lots of trees; people live in houses; you can see
the sky. Needless to say, with so much going for it visually, the
Village has been one of the most photographed areas of the city.
This is especially true nowadays, with the resurgence of filmmaking in New York, and on practically any given day you can find
a movie, television series, or commercial being shot somewhere
in the Village. Quite simply, the Village is New York City’s back
lot—and in this chapter, movie lovers will discover many of the
same Greenwich Village addresses found in directors’ and location managers’ notebooks—including such television classics as
the Friends apartment building, The Cosby Show townhouse,
and the NYPD Blue precinct.
Besides location-spotting, movie lovers who visit the Village
will also find avant-garde cinemas, clubs, and cabarets that provided employment (both on- and offstage) to future stars during
the dues-paying periods of their careers, even a secret sidewalk
that has the footprints of legendary movie stars like Joan Craw-

ford and Gloria Swanson.

244

NEW

1. GREENWICH

YORK:

VILLAGE

THE

MOVIE

“BACK

LOVER™’S

GUIDE

LOT”

Bedford/Grove/Barrow/Commerce

Streets

In the days when Hollywood’s Paramount Studios still had its
back lot, the New York section was said to have been modeled

on this cluster of blocks in Greenwich Village. Indeed, wandering around this enchanting enclave of tiny townhouses, fantasy
cottages, ivy-covered apartment buildings, cozy courtyards and
mews, you wonder for a second whether you’re really in New
York or in some Hollywood art director’s vision of the city. You
may be further confused if you happen to have ventured onto
Bedford, Grove, Barrow, or Commerce Streets on one of the
many days or nights when a film crew is on the scene with trucks,
trailers, lights, cameras, stars, and extras.

Directors love to shoot in this neighborhood—not only for
the varied architecture, but because these little streets are easily
sealed off from traffic and crowds. Major landmarks for movie
lovers to look for—either on-screen or on a walking tour of
NYC’s own back lot—are Chumley’s, a former speakeasy at 86
Bedford Street that is now a bar/restaurant and that still has no
sign. Chumley’s has been used as a typical NYC tavern in the
features Reds (1981), Wolfen (1981), Bright Lights, Big City

Greenwich Village Friends: Matthew Perry, Jennifer Aniston, David
Schwimmer,

Courteney Cox, Matt LeBlanc, Lisa Kudrow

LE

FS

I

TE IESE

GREENWICH

VILLAGE:

THE

BIG

BACK

LOT

245

Friends apartment
building at Bedford
and Grove

(1988), Woody Allen’s Sweet and Lowdown (1999), and Pollock
(2000), actor-director Ed Harris’s look at the short turbulent life
and career of artist Jackson Pollock. Harris also used the doorway at 52 Barrow Street, which is just off Chumley’s “secret”
Barrow Street courtyard entrance, to represent Pollock’s apartment. When art patron Peggy Guggenheim (Amy Madigan) ar-

rives to check out the hot young artist’s work and finds there’s no
elevator in the building, she remarks, “I don’t climb up five
flights of stairs.” Her sixth sense tells her to climb, however, and
she likes what she sees when she gets there. (In reality, this build-

ing has only two stories.)
Close by, at 38 Commerce Street, the tiny Cherry Lane Theater, founded by poet Edna St. Vincent Millay in 1924, is a
famous off-Broadway playhouse and another popular back-lot

246

NEW?

YORK

2H

(MONME

BOVE

RS! (G UUpiE

location. It has doubled as the historic Provincetown Playhouse
in Reds (1981), became a jazz club in Claude Lelouch’s Bolero
(1982), was the little theater where Gena Rowlands dreams of an
off-Broadway/Times Square version of her life in Woody Allen’s
Another Woman (1988), and was once again a jazz club—called
Beneath the Underdog—where Denzel Washington played trumpet in Spike Lee’s Mo’ Better Blues (1990). The Cherry Lane was
also used by Tina Turner for the classic music video of her hit
song “What’s Love Got to Do with It?” In real life, the Cherry
Lane saw James Dean perform on its stage in the 1954 offBroadway production of Women of Trachis.
Just a few feet away from the Cherry Lane, the restaurant at
50 Commerce Street is another back-lot landmark. Formerly
Grange Hall, it was a lunch spot for Edward Burns in The Brothers McMullen (1995), the comedy he also wrote and directed focusing on the lives and loves of three Irish-American brothers. A
few years later, Woody Allen used it for Anything Else (2003); as
did Martin Scorsese—not for a feature film, but rather a commercial (which he does occasionally—for big bucks, no doubt)
for a French cell-phone company. Grange Hall’s most recent appearance was in the final episode of Sex and the City. Shortly after the episode was lensed, Grange Hall shut down as well. It has
since resurfaced as the Blue Mill Tavern, which is what it was for
many years prior to its Grange Hall incarnation.
The most famous location on the Village back lot can be
found at 90 Bedford Street, at the corner of Grove Street. It’s
hard to miss, especially since there are usually groups of tourists photographing this rather unprepossessing brick apartment
building with a French restaurant below. Reason? It was here
that four (Rachel, Monica, Chandler, and Joey) out of six New
York Friends lived for most of the hit show’s ten-year run.
Friends fans may also recognize the Lucille Lortel Theater, just a
short block away at 121 Christopher Street, as the off-Broadway
house where Joey (Matt LeBlanc) once starred ina play.
Back over on Grove Street, the lovely little red house at number 12 belonged to Angela Lansbury in The World of Henry
Orient (1964). Next door, another secret courtyard—Grove
Court—conceals six small houses and a lovely garden. Closer to
Bleecker Street, 26 Grove Street was where John Ritter cavorted

GREENWICH

MILENGES

THE

BiG)

BACK

BOT

247

in Hero at Large (1980). Around the corner, the half-timbered

place with the twin-peaked roof at 102 Bedford Street was supposed to have been a trendy discothéque in The April Fools
(1969), which starred Jack Lemmon and Catherine Deneuve.
Next door, the clapboard cottage at 100 Bedford was the workshop of the sashmaker who once lived in the handsome frame
house on the corner at 17 Grove Street, which was built in 1822.
In 1970, Sandy Dennis and Jack Lemmon were seen scaling
down the side of this historic house in The Out-of-Towners,

whereas in 1985, Woody Allen and Mia Farrow passed by this
picturesque corner in their pursuit of metropolitan happiness in
Hannah and Her Sisters. In late 1987, Mr. Allen again turned up
on Grove Street to shoot sequences for Another Woman.
Number 106 Bedford Street is another standard-issue New
York City brick apartment house, but it may also be of interest
to movie lovers, as it was here that Lawrence Selman lived. A
neighborhood celebrity, this little man, whose developmental
disabilities have not kept him from living a full life as an activ-

Cherry Lane Theater
a

248

NEW

YORK?

THE

MOVIE

LOVERSyGuUT De

ist and fund-raiser, was the subject of the 2003 Academy
Award-nominated short film The Collector of Bedford Street.
Farther down Bedford, at the corner of Morton, now occupied
by a trendy Greek taverna called Snack, another back-lot local,
philosopher-chef Kenny Shopsin, ran a funky love-it-or-loathe-it
lunch counter called Shopsin’s for decades. When the crusty
restaurateur (famous for his less-than-charming counterside
manner) lost his lease, filmmaker Matt Mahurin did a full-length

documentary on the man and his enterprise titled I Like Killing
Flies, which was a surprise hit at the 2004 Sundance Film Festi-

val. (Kenny currently holds forth a few blocks away at 54
Carmine Street.)

Just around the corner from the old Shopsin’s, the brownstone building at 66 Morton Street is where Kevin Anderson
had a flat that he famously sublet in The Night We Never Met
(1993); the same building housed Harrison Ford in Working Girl
(1988) and Winona Ryder in Autumn in New York (2000). Back
on Bedford Street, architecture buffs will find Greenwich Village’s oldest house (which dates back to 1799), the brick-andwood dwelling back at number 77. For movie lovers, however,
the skinny house next door at 75 Bedford may be of more interest, since it was one of John Barrymore’s early New York residences. The city’s narrowest house, at just nine-and-one-half feet
wide, was also home to poet Edna St. Vincent Millay.
2. ST.

LUKE’S

PLACE

This may well be NYC’s most beautiful and most frequently photographed block. Lying between Seventh Avenue South and Hudson Street, St. Luke’s Place boasts trees, old-fashioned street

lamps, and fifteen elegant brick townhouses all in a row. Built in

the 1850s, these Italianate beauties have been home to a number of famous New Yorkers. Mayor Jimmy Walker—whose wild
and woolly life was romanticized by Bob Hope in the 1957 Paramount film Beau James—once lived at number 6. Playwright
Sherwood Anderson occupied number 12, poet Marianne Moore
had number 14, and Theodore Dreiser, whose novel An American Tragedy became the 1951 Paramount film A Place in the

Sun, starring Elizabeth Taylor and Montgomery Clift, called

GREENWICH

VILLAGE:

THE

BIG

BACK

LOT

249

Cosby Show
townhouse, St.
Luke’s Place

number 16 home. This beautiful block has also lured many filmmakers. Its most famous screen appearance was in Wait Until
Dark (1967), with the house at number 4 serving as the NYC
apartment where the blind woman played by Audrey Hepburn
was terrorized by a thug (Alan Arkin) who operated out of a van
parked across the street in front of the playground. Part of the
playground, by the way, is occupied by a public swimming pool,
which movie lovers will recognize as the spot where Cathy Moriarty and Robert De Niro met up in Martin Scorsese’s Raging

Bull (1980).
Back across the street, 10 St. Luke’s Place was the prime-time
townhouse

where Bill Cosby resided with his Huxtable TV

family on The Cosby Show. Ragtime (1980) and The Survivors

250

NEWS

YORK?

THE

MOVIE

LOVERS

"GUIDE

(1983) have also used St. Luke’s Place as a location, as has Sex
and the City, Law & Order, and countless TV commercials and

print ads.
3. HESTER
Morton
Bleecker

STREET
Street

BLOCK
between

Seventh

Avenue

and

Street

Hester Street was a charming little black-and-white film about
Jewish immigrants living on NYC’s Lower East Side at the beginning of the century. But the film’s director, Joan Micklin Silver,
had a hard time finding the Lower East Side of her story in 1970s
New York. The real Hester Street, having turned into a thriving
commercial district of discount clothing and electronics stores,
looked all wrong; whereas other parts of the historic neighborhood were too devastated even to consider. So Hester Street and
company headed north and created their own “Lower East Side”

Hester Street on Morton Street, 1974
a

GREENWICH

VILLAGE:

THE

BIG

BACK

LOT

251

on a wonderfully isolated block of Morton Street that is pretty
much unchanged architecturally since the early 1900s. The metamorphosis of Morton Street involved masking streetlamps and
adding awnings to some of the buildings to create historically
accurate storefronts. Props such as pushcarts and vintage automobiles completed the picture.
Other Village blocks that have been dressed for the movies
include East 6th Street between Avenues A and B for The Godfather (1972) and East 11th Street between Avenues A and B for
Ragtime (1981).
4. THE

DUPLEX

61

Christopher

Street

Originally across Seventh Avenue at 55 Grove Street, this legendary Village cabaret, founded in 1950, is where former unknowns like Joan Rivers, Jo Anne Worley, Rodney Dangerfield,
Stiller and Meara, and Woody Allen got some of their first professional gigs. Of Woody’s Duplex days it is said that when the
comic couldn’t get a rise out of his audience, he penciled in a
mustache and started doing Groucho Marx’s jokes. If they
laughed, then he knew that his material needed work; if they
didn’t, he could blame it on the audience. Today, in its new location, the Duplex mainly features drag shows like Dressing Room
Divas, but one old-timer who comes back periodically is Joan
Rivers, who tried out many of the jokes she used in her highly
successful one-woman show in London in 2002.
Visit www.theduplex.com.

5. IFC
323

CENTER/WAVERLY
Avenue

of the

THEATER

SITE

Americas

“I met a boy named Frank Mills/In front of the Waverly/But, unfortunately,/I lost his address.” The world heard about this
Greenwich Village neighborhood movie house from the song
“Frank Mills” in the legendary 1960s Broadway musical Hair.
But, unfortunately, moviegoers didn’t get to see the Waverly in
Milos Forman’s film version of Hair in 1979, because the sequence didn’t make the final cut. The theater was not cut out

252

NEW

YORK?

THE

MOVIE

IPO VER YS 2Gi9]/ DE

of Six Degrees of Separation (1993), however, where it furnishes

the background for a climactic scene in which troubled con-artist
Will Smith is taken away by the police at the end of the film.
Situated at the top of the stairs of Greenwich Village’s bustling
West 4th Street subway station, the Waverly has always been a
place where people from different parts of Manhattan, Brooklyn,
Queens, and the Bronx can rendezvous fairly easily for a night at
the movies. This central location may have accounted for the
success of its midnight shows, which have pulled in teens from
far and wide for cult classics like The Rocky Horror Picture
Show, Eraserhead, and Polyester. These days, however, the Waverly, which was a church before it was converted to a movie
house in 1937, is set to begin an exciting new life as the Independent Film Channel Center. This ultramodern triplex—with digital projection capabilities—hopes to be New York’s premier
showcase for independent films.
Visit www. ifcfilms.com.

6. JOHN

BARRYMORE

132

4th

West

RESIDENCE

Street

John Blythe Barrymore lived on the top floor of this West 4th
Street townhouse off Washington Square between 1917 and
1920. Although Barrymore had appeared in films for Adolph
Zukor’s Famous Players Film Company since 1913, he was still
better known as a Broadway matinee idol than a movie star.
Nonetheless, Barrymore’s 1920 screen performance in Dr. Jekyll
and Mr. Hyde brought him great acclaim, and his transformation
from mild-mannered M.D. to monster, supposedly done without
the aid of trick photography, was much discussed at the time. Dr,
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde was made in New York at the Famous Players Studio that once stood at 130 West 56th Street.
Back in Greenwich Village, Barrymore’s penthouse was lavishly appointed with gilded Chinese wallpaper, expensive European antiques, and a large roof garden. To create the latter,
Barrymore brought in some thirty-five tons of topsoil and
planted wisteria, cherry trees, and grapevines. This was his secret
hideaway during an uncharacteristically introspective period of

GREENWICH

VILLAGE:

THE

BIG

BACK

LOT

29'S,

John Barrymore,

right, as Mr. Hyde in
Dr. Jekyll and Mr.
Hyde, 1920

his life. It is reported that Barrymore, who was known for his
amorous adventures, even shunned the company of women for
the first year or so that he spent in his Greenwich Village aerie.
His fling with celibacy and the contemplative life did not last
long, however, for he soon met and fell in love with Blanche
Thomas, a very married poetess who went by the name of
Michael Strange. A tempestuous courtship ensued, and in 1920
Mrs. Thomas became Mrs. Barrymore, and the couple moved to
White Plains.
In the late 1980s, playwright-screenwriter (The Addams Family [1990], In and Out [1997]) Paul Rudnick lived in the Barry-

more apartment, rumored to be haunted by the famous actor.
Whether it was or not, it inspired Rudnick’s 1991 Broadway
play I Hate Hamlet, which told of a young actor living in a Big
Apple apartment haunted by Barrymore’s ghost. During the run
of the show, there were no ectoplasmic incidents, but there was
a newsmaking moment when the tantrum-prone Scottish star
Nicol Williamson, who played Barrymore, went alittle too far in
a dueling scene, nicking costar Evan Handler, who walked offstage and never returned. Today, Handler is less known for the I
Hate Hamlet incident than for his role as Harry Goldenblatt, the
lawyer Charlotte York (Kristin Davis) married and converted to
Judaism for on Sex and the City.

254

NIEIW

YORK

THE

MONE

EO VERS iG DE

Caffe Reggio
SSS

7. CAFFE
119

EE

ES

ET

STREET

REGGIO

MacDougal

Street

The ultimate Greenwich Village coffeehouse—dark, formerly
smoky, with tiny tables, background classical music punctuated
by the constant whoosh of the espresso/cappuccino machine. No
wonder Paul Mazursky used it as a location for his tragicomic
take on early-1950s Bohemian life in Next Stop, Greenwich Village (1975). The same café also turns up in such other set-in-theVillage epics as Shaft (1971) and Serpico (1973), and flashes by,
too, in The Godfather, Part II (1974), The Next Man (1976),

and 13 Going on 30 (2004), and on episodes of The Equalizer
and Law & Order. Meanwhile, movie lovers may remember another landmark Greenwich Village coffeehouse, Le Figaro Café,
just down the street at the corner of Bleecker and MacDougal as
the spot where ex-con Al Pacino got reacquainted with his old
girlfriend Penelope Ann Miller in Carlito’s Way (1993).
Visit www.caffereggio.com.

GREENWICH

VILLAGE:

8. SERPICO

HOUSE

5-7

Minetta

THE

BIG

BACK

LOT

255

y

Street

Based on atrue story, Serpico (1973) was a hard-hitting Sidney
Lumet film that starred Al Pacino as a New York City undercover cop who tried to rectify major corruption among New
York’s Finest. In the film, the title character, Frank Serpico, was

an offbeat guy from Brooklyn who fancied Greenwich Village
life. He took courses at New York University, tried hanging out
with the coffeehouse crowd, and lived in a basement pad with a
tiny rear garden where he could often be found listening to opera
records. The quintessential Greenwich Village apartment building used for Serpico stands just off the Avenue of the Americas
on Minetta Street. Only one block long, Minetta Street is especially attractive to cinematographers because it is easy to block

Serpico’s pad

256

NEW

WORK

TIRE

MOVIE

TO Vers

Gia iDiE

off and because it curves in such a way that there’s never any
danger of seeing anything else—such as the nearby Avenue of the
Americas—even in a long shot.
At the other end of this little block, movie lovers may also recognize the Minetta Tavern at 113 MacDougal Street as the place
where attorney Brad Pitt had a get-together with the childhood
friends he got acquitted of murder charges in Sleepers (1996),
and also as an establishment called La Trattoria in Mickey Blue
Eyes (1998). In the film the restaurant was owned by the mafiaconnected James Caan, who had little in common with British
auctioneer Hugh Grant other than the fact that Grant was about
to marry his daughter.
9. KIM’S
144

VIDEO

Bleecker

III/BLEECKER

ST.

CINEMA

SITE

Street

Now home to an eclectic video store, this site was once the very
eclectic Bleecker Street Cinema movie theater. Where else could
Woody Allen, playing a movie lover in his 1989 Crimes and
Misdemeanors,

catch

Hitchcock’s

little-known

1937

comedy

Mr. and Mrs. Smith or Betty Hutton’s 1943 musical Happy Go
Lucky? And in the mid-1980s, what better cinema than this to
have seen Desperately Seeking Susan (1985), since this is the very
movie house where Aidan Quinn supposedly worked as a projectionist in Susan Seidelman’s offbeat look at life in Lower Manhattan. Village history buffs may be interested in the fact that the
two buildings that housed the Bleecker Street Cinema were once
home to a landmark restaurant of the 1880s called Mori’s.
10.

BAREFOOT
111

Waverly

IN

THE

PARK

HOUSE

Place

In the play version of Neil Simon’s Barefoot in the Park, newlyweds Corie and Paul Bratter spend three acts coping with the
perils of setting up housekeeping in pre-Yuppie Manhattan on
the top floor of a brownstone in the East 40s. For the film version, however, Neil Simon and director Gene Saks decided that
Greenwich Village would offer a more picturesque backdrop
than the Upper East Side. Thus they transplanted the Bratters,

GREENWICH

VILLAGE:

THE

BIG

BACK

LOT

257

Jane of Washington
Square: Fonda in

Barefoot in the Park,

1967

played by Robert Redford and Jane Fonda, to a red-brick
“brownstone” with a steep stoop and wrought-iron balustrades
on Waverly Place, just off Washington Square Park. Other Village locations used for the film (interiors were done at Paramount Studios in Hollywood) included a Sixth Avenue deli, West
10th Street, lower Fifth Avenue, and, of course, Washington
Square Park, where, toward the end of the film, we find a tipsy

Robert Redford dancing . . . barefoot in the park.
11. WASHINGTON

SQUARE

PARK

If Greenwich Village has a center, this is it. Formerly the site of
public hangings, Washington Square Park was turned into a
public recreational park in the 1820s. It is distinguished by its
handsome Ionic Greek Revival townhouses, some dating back to
the 1830s, and by its grand Beaux Arts arch, which was erected
in 1895 and which has become a symbol of Downtown Manhattan. Needless to say, the arch has turned up in many films—from
On the Town (1949) to Barefoot in the Park (1966) to When

258

NEW

YORK?

THE

MOVIE

LOMER™S 1G: UT DIE

Harry Met Sally (1989), where it furnished the highly romantic
backdrop for Meg Ryan and Billy Crystal to unromantically decide early on in the film that they can’t be friends (only to become lovers in the final reel).
Since it is shared by drug dealers, students, chess players, joggers, and well-heeled denizens of the smart townhouses and
apartment buildings that surround it, the park itself is a microcosm of the heady mix of humanity that makes up Greenwich
Village. Films that have capitalized on its egalitarian dimension
include Searching for Bobby Fisher (1993), which starred Laurence Fishburne as a regular at the Park’s Chess Table Alley; Kids
(1995), Larry Clark’s shocking look at a gang of NYC street
kids, who brutally beat up a man in the Performance Pit, while
the rest of the park people look elsewhere; Addicted to Love
(1997), where the jilted duo of Meg Ryan and Matthew Broderick take revenge on their former lovers via man-biting monkeys
and perfume-spritzing kids with water pistols at the same Performance Pit; and A Perfect Murder (1998), where megarich Upper
East Sider Michael Douglas pays $400,000 to small-time crook
Viggo Mortensen, a transaction complicated by angry dogs, obtrusive Rollerbladers, a purse snatcher, and a near miss with a
truck on the SW corner.
And then there’s The Heiress, the famous 1949 Hollywood
film, which starred Olivia de Havilland, Ralph Richardson, and
Montgomery Clift, and was based on the Henry James novella,
Washington Square, set at the house of Dr. James Sloper and his
spinster daughter, at 16 Washington Square North. For the film,
the house as well as Washington Square were created on a Hollywood back lot, but for the 1997 Jennifer Jason Leigh—Albert
Finney-Ben Chaplin remake—called Washington Square—a real
Greek Revival townhouse was used. It wasn’t in New York,
however, but in Union Square Park in Baltimore, Maryland,
where most of the film was shot. Henry James himself lived at 1
Washington Square North, by the way, a fact that posh British
art dealer Hugh Grant, in his efforts to raise the culture level of
nouveau-riche Tracey Ullman in Woody Allen’s Small Time
Crooks (2000), points out. That scene was shot on location in
Washington Square. ~

GREENWICH

12.

VILLAGE:

THE

BIG

BADLANDS
388

West

BACK

LOT

259

o
Street

Facing the Hudson River and its beautiful new esplanade and redeveloped piers-turned—parks, Badlands is a remnant of the
area’s raunchier days. Currently a gay video store, Badlands was
formerly a gay bar of the same name that was much in the news
in 1979, when

director William

Friedkin

used it and other

nearby locations for scenes for Cruising. The film starred Al
Pacino as an underground cop looking fora serial killer who
preyed on gay victims. Many gay activists considered the film
and its self-loathing gay murderer homophobic and protested
the filming. One protest had a crowd of a thousand marching
through the Village chanting “Cruising must go,” after then
mayor Ed Koch had refused demands that the city withdraw
permits for the filming. Perhaps Friedkin should have paid more
attention to the protests, since the film, if not a milestone in

homophobia, was a major bomb.
13.

SAMBRANCO

ANTIQUES

370

Street

Bleecker

In both Virginia Woolf’s novel Mrs. Dalloway and in Michael
Cunningham’s book-turned-film The Hours (2002), which was
inspired by it, flowers play an important role. The first line of
Woolf’s book is “Mrs. Dalloway said she would buy the flowers
herself,” whereas the first time we see Meryl Streep in the film,
she’s buying flowers for a party she’s giving that day for her dying
poet friend, Ed Harris. For the film, the production passed on using a real flower shop because, well, frankly, the problem with a
real flower shop is the flowers! There are just too many of them
and flower shops are designed to display and sell flowers—not accommodate fussy art directors, much less cameras, lighting
equipment, and production crews. So, for their all-important
flower shop, The Hours redid an antique store on Bleecker Street,
which simply cleared out the antiques to the back storage area
and let the production designers bring in all the right blooms.
In an intriguing bit of insider cameo casting, the woman who
sells Streep the flowers in The Hours is the esteemed British actress Eileen Atkins, whose Virginia Woolf connections are espe-

260

NEWoO

YORK:

THE

MOV

NE; LOVERS?

GUIDE

cially impressive. She has twice portrayed Virginia Woolf on the
New York stage, both in her one-woman show A Room of One’s
Own

(which Atkins wrote) and in Vita and Virginia, a two-

character play in which Atkins costarred with Vanessa Redgrave,
who played Woolf’s friend and one-time lover Vita SackvilleWest. Furthermore, Atkins adapted Mrs. Dalloway for the 1997
film directed by Marleen Gorris and starring Vanessa Redgrave.
14.

HB

STUDIO

120

Bank

Street

Based on Bank Street since 1957, this prestigious acting school
was founded in 1943 by Austrian-born actor/director Herbert
Berghoff. Among the many former HB students who have found
show-business fame are Anne Bancroft, Candice Bergen, Matthew Broderick, Peggy Cass, Stockard Channing, Jill Clayburgh,
James Coco, Robert De Niro, Faye Dunaway, Whoopi Goldberg,
Judd Hirsch, Hal Holbrook, Harvey Korman, Jack Lemmon,
Lorna Luft, William H. Macy, Dina Merrill, Bette Midler, Liza
Minnelli, Al Pacino, Christopher Reeve, Eva Marie Saint, Lily
Tomlin, and Sam Waterston.
Noted for its star teachers as well as for its famous graduates,
HB counts playwright/screenwriter Horton Foote (The Trip to
Bountiful), actors Charles Nelson Reilly, Jerry Stiller, Anne Jackson, and the late Sandy Dennis and William Hickey (Prizzi’s
Honor) as recent members of its faculty. The studio’s legendary
top teacher was Herbert Berghoff’s wife of many years, Uta Hagen, who died in 2004. Although Hagen originated the role of
Martha in Edward Albee’s Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? on
Broadway in 1963, Elizabeth Taylor won her second Oscar when
she played the same role in the 1966 film version of the play.
After many years on the stage, Miss Hagen finally made her film
debut in 1972 as the Russian grandmother of those strange twin
boys in The Other. She later appeared in featured roles in The
Boys from Brazil (1978) and Reversal of Fortune (1990), in
which she played the personal maid of Sunny von Billow (Glenn
Close). Hagen is best remembered, however, as one of the
world’s most influential acting teachers.
Visit www.hbstudio.org.

GREENWICH

15.

VILLAGE:

WESTBETH
463

West

THE

BIG

BACK

LOT

261

’
Street

Since 1970 this huge complex of brick loft buildings has provided low-cost housing for Manhattan artists. Dating back to
1896, the buildings of Westbeth—as the place is known in its
present incarnation—were originally the headquarters of the Bell
Telephone/ Western Electric Laboratories, one of the most important research facilities in communications technology in the
country. Among the wonders developed here were the vacuum
tube and the condenser microphone, a dynamic duo that made
it possible to electronically amplify, as well as to record, sound.
These discoveries, in turn, paved the way for something that
Edison had wanted to do with motion pictures from the very beginning: make them talk. It was not until 1923, however, that
Western Electric scientists came up with a practical system of
synchronized sound for the movies. Offering the process—which
was dubbed Vitaphone, and which featured a sound disc that

Making movies talk: Vitaphone system at work
Se

262

NEW ONOR Kis THE:

MOY

RE! LOWERS?

GUIDE

was synchronized with the camera—to various movie studios,
Western Electric met with little interest from an industry that
was content to make fabulous profits from silent films. Only one
company had the foresight to realize the potential of sound:
Warner Bros., which quickly signed an exclusive agreement to
use the Vitaphone sound-on-disc technology for its films.
Interestingly enough, Warners didn’t want Vitaphone to make
its pictures talk, but rather to add background music. In this
way, Warners could provide movie houses all over the country
with films that had the same symphonic accompaniment and special sound effects that big-city first-run houses equipped with
staff orchestras had previously offered. Thus, in Warners’ first
Vitaphone film, Don Juan (which premiered in 1926), star John
Barrymore never uttered a word. The film made history because
it featured a prerecorded score played by the New York Philharmonic Orchestra. It was Warner’s second Vitaphone production,
The Jazz Singer, that changed the course of motion-picture history when it opened ayear later in 1927. Not only did Al Jolson
SS

a

Ra

Westbeth—formerly
Bell Telephone

Laboratories

GREENWICH

VILLAGE:

THE

BIG

BACK

LOT

263

sing, he spoke. He didn’t say very much, mind you, because The
Jazz Singer, like Don Juan, was essentially a silent film that was
relying on Jolson’s singing to pull in audiences. But when the
star insisted on ad-libbing here and there, the film’s director,
Alan Grosland, wound up keeping some of Jolson’s patter in the
picture. No one at the time had any idea of the powerful effect
that Jolson’s speaking, especially his now famous “You ain’t
heard nothin’ yet,” would have on motion-picture audiences. A
new, intimate connection was instantly established between audience and screen actor. The sound revolution had begun, and
there could be no turning back. The scientists at 463 West Street
in Greenwich Village played major roles in starting the revolution.
16.

MEATPACKING
Between

West

Gansevoort

to

DISTRICT
and

Hudson

West

14th

Streets

from

Streets

Now one of the trendiest areas in the West Village, these formerly grungy blocks were the turf of New York’s wholesale
meat business. In the old days, which were a mere decade ago,
this same funky area was also the nighttime home to packs of
transvestite prostitutes as well as some of the city’s kinkiest
nightspots—sex clubs, S&M and leather bars, secret after-hours
spots, many of them gay, but some catering to straights as well.
For filmmakers, the meatpacking district often provided an
edgy backdrop for sequences that usually involved illegal activities. Classic cases in point: Love with the Proper Stranger
(1963), where pregnant Natalie Wood comes to the meatpacking district with Steve McQueen to see an abortionist; Serpico
(1973), where Al Pacino, dressed as a meatpacker, stakes out
an illegal payoff to the police; Fatal Attraction (1987), where
a homicidal Glenn Close lived in a loft at 652 Hudson Street;
Goodfellas (1990), where one of the film’s many bumped-off

bodies is disposed of in a deep freeze; and The Basketball Diaries

(1995), a little-known film that starred Leonardo DiCaprio,
before he was a household word, and then rock singer/Calvin
Klein underwear model Marky Mark, now known as Mark
Wahlberg. Based on the true story of basketball player/poet/rock

264

NEW

YORK:

Pastis, French bistro in Meatpacking

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

District

musician/drug addict Jim Carroll, the film featured an amusing
scene where DiCaprio and Wahlberg are unloading a stolen car
in the meatpacking district; while bickering over the price, the
vehicle is towed away by ever-vigilant NYC traffic employees.
Today, most of the meatpackers have gone, but their former
warehouses—many still sporting the overhead racks and rails
once used to shift the carcasses from truck to freezer and back—
have been renovated to house restaurants, clubs, and residential
lofts. Recent loft-dwellers include Ed Harris, as the AIDSafflicted poet, who lived at 675 Hudson Street in The Hours
(2002), and Samantha Jones (Kim Cattrall), who moved into her
digs at 300 Gansevoort Street in 2000, just when the neighborhood really started heating up and when Sex and the City started
ruling the airwaves. Samantha’s cool address (which actually
doesn’t exist) put her steps away from such fashionable spots as
the ultra-exclusive SoHo House private club, happening restaurants like Spice Market and the faux-French bistro Pastis, and
the chic boutiques of'star designers like Stella McCartney and
Alexander McQueen.

VILLAGE:

GREENWICH

17. SHAFT
621

BAR

Hudson

SITE

THE

BACK

BIG

LOT

265

,

Street

He was a tough black private eye who got caught in the middle
of a bitter battle between a Harlem gangster and a white mob.
The year was 1971, and Shaft, which starred model-turned-actor
Richard Roundtree, was one of the first of a slew of successful
blaxploitation films that were big on violence, racial tension,
jivey dialogue, and heavy sex. Much of the latter took place in
John Shaft’s classic early-1970s duplex—exposed-brick walls,
louvered wooden shutters, serious shelving, leather furniture—
which would have been on Jane Street across from the No Name
Bar at 621 Hudson. The apartment was a set, but the No Name
was a real place, and it also saw a lot of action in the film. Today, after a stint as a deli, the former No Name is a smart little
Italian restaurant called Piccolo Angelo (little angel).
18.

LAUREN
75

Bank

BACALL

APARTMENT

Street

Betty Bacall was still seventeen when she and her mother moved
into this large brick apartment building at the corner of Eighth
Avenue and Bank Street. With high school behind her, Betty balanced making the rounds of modeling agencies and photographers’ offices with ushering for $8 a week at various Shubert
theaters, as well as being a volunteer hostess at the Stage Door
Canteen. All the while she hoped and waited for that big showbusiness break. The break was not, it turned out, her winning the
rather dubious title of Miss Greenwich Village in 1942; nor was
it when she landed a small part in the Broadway play Franklin
Street later that same year (the show closed out of town). Finally,
however, dame fortune showed her face when Bacall was introduced to Harper’s Bazaar editor Nicolas de Gunzburg, who in
turn introduced her to the legendary fashion editor Diana Vreeland. Bacall subsequently appeared in seven issues of Harper’s
Bazaar, but it was her cover in March 1943—showing her pos-

ing in a chic suit in front of a Red Cross blood donor office—that
caught the attention of the country, including such Hollywood
heavyweights as Columbia Pictures, Howard Hughes, David O.

266

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’*’S

GUIDE

Bacall on Bank Street

Selznick, and Howard Hawks. With firm offers from both Co-

lumbia and Hawks, it was good-bye Bank Street, hello Hollywood, as Betty Bacall decided to sign with Hawks. It was also
good-bye “Betty,” as Hawks quickly rechristened his discovery
Lauren. Now all he needed was the right vehicle for his gorgeous
new star. By the end of 1943, both the vehicle, To Have and

Have Not, and the costar, Humphrey Bogart, had been found.
19. VILLAGE
178

VANGUARD

Seventh

Avenue

South

Opened in a cellar on nearby Charles Street in 1934, this classic
Greenwich Village night spot moved to its current location a year
later and is known mainly for jazz these days. It was also used as
a piano bar in Woody Allen’s 2003 film Anything Else. Back in
the early 1940s, however, cabaret acts were frequently booked at
the Village Vanguard, and one of these, a group called the Revuers, saw several of its members—notably Judy Holliday, Betty

GREENWICH

VILLAGE:

THE

BIG

BACK

LOT

267

Comden, and Adolph Green—lured to the West Coast by a Hollywood talent scout. Ironically, their first Hollywood film was a
1944 Don Ameche/Carmen Miranda musical titled Greenwich
Village. But their roles in the picture were minuscule, and before
long all three performers found themselves back in the real
Greenwich Village once more. Several years later, however, the
Revuers had considerably better luck: Holliday became a Broadway star—via Born Yesterday, and went on to Hollywood film
fame in Adam’s Rib (1949) and in the 1950 screen version of her
Broadway success—while Comden and Green became important
screenwriters and lyricists at MGM, where they helped create
such classics as On the Town (1949), Singin’ in the Rain (1952),
and The Band Wagon (1953).
Call 212-255-4037 or visit wwwvillagevanguard.net/frames.htm.

20.

RAMBUSCH
40

West

SITE

13th

Street

This narrow seven-story building with the whimsical Gothic
archway as its main entrance housed the offices and studios of
the noted Rambusch design firm from 1898 to 1999. Specializing in stained-glass windows and in decorating the interiors of
churches, the Rambusch company found a whole new outlet for
its creativity and craftsmanship with the rise of the movie palace
in the 1910s and 1920s. Responsible for the gilding of hundreds
of theaters all over the country and the world was Harold W.
Rambusch (son of the firm’s founder), whose grandest achievement was the lavish interior of the now-demolished Roxy Theater at 50th Street and Seventh Avenue. Besides his work on the
Roxy, Rambusch also decorated the Paramount and Loew’s
Kings in Brooklyn, the Beacon on Broadway in Manhattan, and
the Loew’s Jersey in Jersey City. Feeling that the opulent movie
houses he helped create were more than just places for the public to see films, Rambusch wrote in 1929: “In our big modern
movie palaces there are collected the most gorgeous rugs, furniture, and fixtures that money can produce. No kings or emperors have wandered through more luxurious surroundings. In a
sense, these theaters are social safety valves in that the public can

268

NEW?)

¥ OuRKA-7

AiEt

MiOW NE) DOV IER Se Kou Dye

Rambusch

studios, 1987

partake of the same luxuries as the rich and use them to the same
full extent.” Much of that luxury and splendor was conceived at
the Rambusch atelier on 13th Street.
Today Rambusch is headquartered in Jersey City and their
original Greenwich Village building houses offices.
21. AS

GOOD

31-33

AS

West

IT GETS
12th

APARTMENT

Street

Jack Nicholson was grumpy homophobic writer Melvin Udall,
so set in his sick ways that he couldn’t bear any change in his
daily routine. Greg Kinnear was Simon, his gay artist neighbor,
with an adorable little dog named Verdell, that undermined
Nicholson’s obsessive-compulsive serenity. In the 1997 James L.
Brooks film As Good as It Gets, the two live in the same distinctive West Village building with fat stone facade and ornate
wrought-iron marquee—and they are anything but good neighbors. Although the exterior of the apartment building was the

GREENWICH

VILLAGE:

THE

BIG

BACK

LOT

269

real thing, the interiors were created on a soundstage on the Sony
Pictures lot (formerly the old MGM studios) in Culver City, California. The paintings decorating Nicholson’s fictional flat were
from his own collection. For the role of Verdell, no less than six
Brussels griffons (a relatively rare breed of canine) were used,
although a pushy pup from Texas named Jill reportedly got the
most screen time.
22.

DUSTIN

HOFFMAN

16

11th

West

RESIDENCE

Street

It was all coming together for Dustin Hoffman in March 1970.
The years of struggling to break into the acting business—years
that included being everything from a janitor to an orderly in a
mental hospital—were all behind him. His overnight success
as a confused college student in Mike Nichols’s The Graduate
(1967), coupled with his poignant portrayal of street person
Ratso Rizzo in John Schlesinger’s Midnight Cowboy (1969), had

as /t Gets
Jack Nicholson/Greg Kinnear apartment building in As Good

270

NEWO

MORK?

THEM

OV NE TOW

ER

SsiiG Wa DE

not only earned him two Academy Award nominations but
had assured him of bankable superstardom. Among the fruits
of Hoffman’s success was an apartment in a handsome Greek
Revival townhouse on a very posh block off Fifth Avenue in the
Village. Here, Hoffman lived quietly and privately with his first
wife, Ann. On March 6, 1970, however, all New York learned of
Hoffman’s address when the house next door, 18 West 11th
Street, exploded and caught fire, killing one person and causing
pandemonium on the block with police cars, fire engines, TV
crews, newspaper reporters, and streams of gawkers. Hoffman
was reportedly seen carrying paintings and at least one Tiffany
lampshade out of his own house, which suffered considerable
damage in the blast, before police prevented him from reentering
the premises.
The blast story stayed in the papers for quite some time.
At first, it was thought that the explosion had been an accident
caused by a gas leak, but later it turned out that the basement of
18 West 11th Street had been used as a bomb-manufacturing
center by the radical 1960s terrorist group the Weathermen, and
that the accident had been caused by all the explosives on the
premises. Today, a modern, oddly angled brick townhouse now
occupies the site of all the commotion back in 1970, and Mr.
Hoffman has long since deserted the Village for the Upper West
Side.
23.

VILLAGE

RESTAURANT

62

9th

West

Street

Today a classy French bistro called Village Restaurant, this prime
piece of downtown real estate was once a gay cabaret called the
Lion. In the summer of 1960, the Lion held talent contests on
Thursday nights, and awarded the winner a weeklong engagement at the club plus free dinners and drinks. On one of those
Thursdays, an eighteen-year-old woman from Brooklyn wowed
the audience with her rendition of “A Sleepin’ Bee” from Cole
Porter’s House of Flowers, and won the contest hands down.

Broke at the time, the realistic young songstress was more interested in the week’s worth of free meals than in the week’s booking. She said later of her Lion gig, “In those days, I could be had

GREENWICH

VILLAGE:

THE

BIG

BACK

LOT

271

for a baked potato.” In case you haven’t guessed who the winner was, it was Barbra Streisand. A portrait of the star hangs at
the back of the current establishment’s front dining room.
24.

CINEMA

VILLAGE

22

12th

East

Street

At this well-known art house, the specialties are independent and
foreign-language films. On-screen, Cinema Village was where a
private detective snaps a photo of Richard Gere’s Unfaithful
wife, Diane Lane, and her younger lover, Olivier Martinez, as
they leave the theater in Adrian Lyne’s 2002 film.
Call 212-924-3363 or visit www.cinemavillage.com.

25.

THE
26

BEAUCAIRE
East

10th

Street

A veritable high-rise Venetian palazzo—never mind the French
name—this 1927 apartment building near New York University
housed Richard Gere for much of the 1980s and 1990s. Among
real-estate insiders, the Beaucaire was nicknamed the Richard
Gere Building. These days, the reclusive Mr. Gere and his wife,
Carrie Lowell, divide their time between a townhouse in another
part of the Village and a classy country house in the Pound Ridge
section of Westchester County. Susan Sarandon and Tim Robbins are two other star names associated with the Beaucaire.
26.

PUBLIC
425

THEATER

Lafayette

Street

Built between 1853 and 1881 to house the Astor Library (the
city’s first free public library), this exotic Romanesque palazzo
now houses the late producer Joseph Papp’s New York Shakespeare Festival/Public Theater complex. Known for developing
such landmark theatrical productions as Hair and A Chorus Line,
the Public Theater and Papp discovered many talented “unknowns.” One of Papp’s major finds in the 1970s was the Puerto
Rican-American playwright Miguel Piiiero, whose greatest tri-

272

NEW

YORK

THE

MIOMPE

IO WIEIR ES 1G DIE

umph, the gritty prison drama Short Eyes, premiered at the Public in 1974 and made the playwright the toast of New York. The
rise and fall of the drug-addicted, ex-con playwright was documented in the 2001 film Piero, which starred Benjamin Bratt (of
Law & Order fame) and featured the real Public Theater in nu-

merous scenes, including a famous fight where Pifiero tells Papp
(Mandy Patinkin) to “fuck off” after being barred from the
premises.

Today, the Public lures movie lovers to those same premises
with its dynamic Film at the Public presentations, featuring firstruns of foreign and U.S. films that don’t get wide distribution as
well as revivals and retrospectives.
Call 212-260-2400 or visit www.publictheaterorg.

27.

SILK
14

BUILDING

East

4th

Street

With Tower Records taking over the ground floor, this distinctive
loft building—built in 1869 as New York’s first Normal and
High School—has housed some of the country’s coolest celebrities over the last two decades. Among the hip and the famous
who have lived at the trendy East Village address have been Cher,
fellow rocker Keith Richards, pop goddess Britney Spears, actors
Rob Lowe, Kelly McGillis, and Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman
in their together days.
28.

ANTHOLOGY
32

Second

FILM

ARCHIVES

Avenue

An international center for the preservation, study, and exhibition of alternative and avant-garde film and video, this vital
institution was originally a division of Joseph Papp’s Public Theater when it opened there in 1970. Based in the historic Second
Avenue Courthouse Building since the 1980s, the center has two
theaters, which feature public showings of daily programs of
everything from recently restored classics—such as the 1929
backstage drama Piccadilly, starring Anna May Wong—to the
latest videos by the likes of Erika Yeomans, Neil Ira Needleman, and Cetywa Powell. The archves is also the site of the an-

VILLAGE:

GREENWICH

THE

BIG

BACK

LOT

YE

Anthology Film Archives
SS

nual New York Underground Film Festival, currently held in
March. The longtime artistic director of the center is well-known
film critic and “underground” filmmaker (The Brig, 1964) Jonas
Mekas.
For program information, call 212-505-5181 or visit
www.anthologyfilmarchives.org.

29.

NINTH
321

PRECINCT

East

5th

Street

NYPD’s East Village headquarters, this police station, like its
counterpart, the Tenth Precinct over in Chelsea (used for The
Naked City), has also been immortalized on celluloid. In the
1970s, this was where a bald cop called Kojak (Telly Savalas) reported to duty (even though the show was shot in Los Angeles);

and in the 1990s, the same police station became the Fifteenth
Precinct for the still-running and also set in New York but shot
in Hollywood series NYPD Blue.

274

30.

NEW

YORK:

THE:

MOV

ST.-MARKS-IN-THE-BOWERY
10th

Street

and

Second

NE

POWER?SIGUA DIE

CHURCH

Avenue

One of the city’s most historic houses of worship, St. Marks was
established in 1799 on the former estate of New York’s first governor, Peter Stuyvesant, who is buried in the churchyard. Movie
lovers may recall its Georgian facade as well as its stained
glass-windowed interior from Sidney Lumet’s 1966 film, The
Group. It was at St. Marks that Kay Strong, the ambitious character played by Joanna Pettet, married Harold Peterson, the
“master of unproduced plays” portrayed by Larry Hagman. The
film’s best St. Marks scene has Lakey (Candice Bergen) arriving
at the wedding in a glamorous Morgan sports car. At the end of
the film, St. Marks again figures in the picture as the setting for
Kay’s funeral, after the stresses of climbing the corporate ladder
result in her committing suicide. The Group’s wedding and funeral sequences were both shot by Lumet on the same day.
Two other movie weddings recently took place at this historic
church: Russell Crowe tied the knot with Jennifer Connelly in A
Beautiful Mind in 2001, although the period was the 1940s; and
recently, bridesmaid Sandra Bullock was forced to walk out of a
girlfriend’s ceremony in Two Weeks Notice (2002), when her de-

manding Donald Trump-like boss, Hugh Grant, texts her on her
cell phone, wanting her to help him pick out a suit.
31.

THEATER
80

St.

80

Marks

SITE
Place

Now the headquarters for the off-Broadway Pearl Theatre company, back in the pre-Turner Classic Movies and pre-plasma TV
era, this was the Theater 80 St. Marks, one of the city’s premier
revival houses. Although it no longer shows classic movies, the
theater is still worth a visit, if only to check out the sidewalk,
where movie lovers will find concrete slabs with the handprints,
footprints, and autographs of such stars as Myrna Loy, Gloria
Swanson, Alexis Smith, Ruby Keeler, Joan Blondell, and Joan
Crawford. Theater 80’s former owner/director Howard Otway
didn’t raid Grauman’s Chinese in Hollywood for these treasures—they were inscribed by the stars themselves in the early

GREENWICH

VILLAGE:

THE

BIG

BACK

LOT

275

Crawford at
Theater 80,

1971

1970s in order to celebrate and publicize Otway’s conversion of
an off-Broadway theater into a full-fledged film-revival house.
In the late 1980s, Mr. Otway looked back with amusement on
the evening that his longtime friend Joan Crawford came to the
theater for her sidewalk ceremony. Playing the star to the hilt,
Crawford arrived in a huge limousine, and since she was still a
paid spokesperson for her late husband’s company, Pepsi-Cola,
she had seen that the limo was fitted with cushions that looked
like giant Pepsi-Cola bottle caps. Once inside Theater 80, Miss
Crawford happened to notice a young assistant drinking a YooHoo. “What are you doing?” she demanded of the frightened
young man.
“Oh, I’m sorry,” he responded. “I didn’t know you were coming, Miss Crawford.”
“Don’t apologize,” Crawford boomed. “Hide it!”
Less in character was Joan’s sidewalk signing in which the legendary fussbudget ran out of cement before finishing her last
name. “Let them know I don’t plan ahead,” she quipped.
Visit www.pearltheatre.org.

276

NIEW = YOUR: Kise TABE®

4

.

MON TES ISONGE Re SIiGi0 ie

ad

a

Big hair day: Drag queens in Tompkins Square Park for Wigstock: The
Movie, 1995

32.

TOMPKINS

SQUARE

PARK

5th

Streets

between

to

9th

Avenues

A

and

B

Not known for its green spaces, New York’s East Village surprises with this sixteen-acre park over at the beginning of Alphabet City—as the area encompassed by Avenues A, B, C, etc. is
known. Laid out in the 1830s, Tompkins Square Park has the
distinction of being the locale for what is said to be the first labor demonstration—by the carpenters union in 1874—in the
United States. About a century later, when the East Village was
the East Coast capital of hippiedom, the park was the site of
happenings, be-ins, and love-ins. A few decades later, it was a
trouble spot once again, when it saw homeless squatters battle
the NYPD over a curfew enacted to protect the newly Yuppified
area’s real-estate values. When the squatters refused to move
from the shantytown they had erected in the park, the police
forced them out in what was a very ugly chapter in East Village
history.
On a more festive note, in the 1980s and 1990s, Tompkins

GREENWICH

VILLAGE:

THE

BIG

BACK

LOT

PLTET

Square was famous for hosting Wigstock, an annual carnival-like
festival which brought out the city’s most outrageous drag
queens. The event was memorialized in the documentary Wigstock: The Movie (1995). Another film that featured the park
that same year was Die Hard with a Vengence, notably in a scene
where Bruce Willis and Samuel L. Jackson, in their quest to keep
up with a maniacal bomber, try to solve the villain’s latest riddle.
Two years later, Tompkins Square Park is frequently seen in the
Morgan Freeman—written—and-directed Hurricane Streets (1997),

which focuses on the lives, loves, and petty crimes of a pack of
East Village teenagers.

Jeffrey
Ward
©L.2004

petanced.

street.
‘Canal

STEPS
~Hato
gh

2
S

Cot =SS Laer ules

© _afayet?
a

Broadway i
————_ Me = 1 Mercer . Greene

jvenv® attheler

eo

CourtlandAlley
