
Midtown Manhattan:

Archetypal NYC

The movie lover’s Midtown Manhattan represents New York at
its busiest, its most intense, its most exciting. This is the New
York of landmark skyscrapers, legendary department stores, historic grand hotels, glamorous restaurants and nightclubs. Possibly the only place on earth with so much power, energy, and
screen appeal concentrated in such a small space, Midtown is ultimately the hunk of New York that many people think of as
“New York.” One of the reasons that the images of Midtown are
so powerfully embedded in our collective consciousness may well
be because the area has been immortalized by so many films—
especially films made in Hollywood, which needed only the right
music and a couple of dramatic process shots of the Empire State

Building or Rockefeller Center to establish their New York set-

tings. Herewith, then, a look at this awesome part of town—
focusing both on its screen presence over the years as well as on
the dynamic (and occasionally scandalous!) roles that many of its

famed hotels, restaurants, clubs, and office towers have played in
the lives of the movers and shakers of the motion picture business. For the movie lover, indeed for the rest of the world, Midtown is not only archetypal New York, it’s the center of the
earth.


Central Park

~-bentral Park South

2

42

33

41

32

403938

%

A

a6

3435 as)3627[26
2223 24

18 19 20
~Rockefeller

Center

2
=
=
Ss
=

a

2<=
a

16

Ss
oa

Grand Central
7
8

2

Fifth
Aventie

Seventh
Avenue

the
Americas
of
Avenue

©2004 Jelfrey.l. Ward.

Avenue
Madison Park
Avenue

Avenue
Lexington

Third
Aventie


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

1. PENNSYLVANIA
Seventh
34th

and

ARCHETYPAL

STATION

Eighth

Avenues

NYC

33

by
between

3lst

and

Streets

One of the greatest things about film is the way it can document
certain landmarks for all time. A case in point is New York City’s
original Pennsylvania Station, a grand colonnaded Roman temple of a building—actually modeled on Rome’s Baths of Caracalla—that was equally impressive inside with its spectacular
waiting room and iron-and-glass train shed. Built in 1910, the
station bit the dust in 1963, to be replaced by a massive but not
terribly exciting modern hulk that combined an office tower,
Madison Square Garden, and a low-ceilinged subterranean train
station. So to check out the original, it’s necessary to check out a
few videos or DVDs. Start with Applause, a 1929 early talkie
made in New York by director Rouben Mamoulian and starring
the legendary torch singer Helen Morgan as an aging vaudevillian. In the Penn Station sequence Morgan meets her daughter,
whom she’s shipped off to a convent to spare her the realities
of her tough showbiz life, amid crowds of commuters. Fastforward to 1945 and Vincente Minnelli’s The Clock, in which his

then wife Judy Garland meets and falls for a soldier on a fortyeight-hour leave (Robert Walker) at Penn Station, where Walker
rescues Garland’s shoe, which has gotten caught in an escalator.
Although the station scene is highly realistic, Minnelli had the

capable MGM art department do up the whole thing in Culver
City. But for Hitchcock’s 1951 adaptation of Patricia Highsmith’s novel Strangers on a Train, the director used the real sta-

tion for a scene that has police following Farley Granger, who’s
the prime suspect in the murder of his estranged wife, which was
actually committed by a stranger (Robert Walker) he met on a
train. Penn Station was also one of the New York locations used
by director Billy Wilder for the infamous The Seven Year Itch
(1957), which starred Marilyn Monroe. The opening shot of the
film shows Penn Station in all its skylit glory at rush hour on a
hot summer day, as Tom Ewell puts his family on a train to
Maine. Ewell will stay behind in Manhattan and return to his
apartment to find Marilyn as his new neighbor.
As for the current Penn Station, it has made relatively few


NEW

34

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

screen appearances, since New York boasts a much more popular and spectacular train-station location in Grand Central. Still,
movie lovers can catch today’s Penn Station in Clockers (1995),
Hurricane Streets (1997), and A Perfect Murder (1998). In the

last, Viggo Mortensen tries to escape with $400,000 on an Amtrak overnighter to Montreal. A maniacal Michael Douglas foils
his plan, however.
Meanwhile, if all goes according to plan, a third Penn Station
will soon rise within what was the former U.S. Post Office Building. Standing directly across Eighth Avenue from the current
Penn Station/Madison Square Garden, the old post office structure is another neoclassical affair with an enormous staircase
leading to a colonnaded arcade. It went up in 1913, four years
after the original Penn Station, and was designed in the image of
its neighbor. Thus, when it opens in 2006, New York’s new Penn
Station will look and feel much more like the original. Good
news for travelers, filmmakers, and movie lovers.
2. MACY’S
Herald

Square

“The world’s largest store” boasts over 2 million square feet of
floor space and reportedly employs as many as ten thousand
salespeople! For the movie lover, the significance of Macy’s has
less to do with retailing statistics than with a very important
event that took place over a century ago in the building that once
stood on the mammoth department store’s Herald Square site.
That building—demolished at the beginning of the twentieth
century to make way for Macy’s—was a theater called Koster
and Bials Music Hall, and it was there that, on April 23, 1896,
Thomas Edison publicly unveiled the Vitascope, a magical machine that projected lifelike moving images on a twenty-foot
screen set in a huge gilded frame. There were many oohs and
aahs at Koster and Bials that famous evening as the audience saw
a group of seconds-long snippets of such things as a prizefight,
dancing girls, and “Venice, showing gondolas.” One of these little films, titled Sea Waves, depicted rough surf and crashing
breakers and is said to have caused a bit of a stir among the spectators in the front rows. The magic, and ultimately the power, of
motion pictures was clear right from the start.


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

35

About ten years after the debut of motion pictures on the
Macy’s site, Edison’s top director, Edwin S. Porter, shot an important early story film using the newly erected department store
as a location. The film, titled Kleptomaniacs, told the parallel
stories of two women, one rich, the other poor, who get caught
shoplifting at a big department store—and pointed out the disparities between the ways society treats the rich and the poor.
The wealthy woman is let off and considered an unfortunate victim of kleptomania, whereas the other woman is arrested and
ruthlessly hauled off to jail. Clearly, the movies had come a long
way in ten years.
Forty years after Kleptomaniacs, Macy’s had come a long
way, too, when it was given a starring role in Twentieth Century—Fox’s 1947 Christmas classic, Miracle on 34th Street, which
pits an eccentric Macy’s Santa Claus against a bah-humbug toy
department head. Besides a number of exteriors shot at Macy’s,
the film also includes footage of the store’s famed once-a-year
media event, the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade. The parade
turned up again in the lackluster 1994 remake of Miracle, which


36

NEW"

YORK:

THE

MOVIEMEOMVMER
SS *G UNDE

although still set in New York, was shot largely in Chicago. Since
Macy’s refused to be associated with the remake, the store’s
name was changed to the fictitious CF Cole’s, with Chicago’s famous Art Institute serving as the faux store’s exterior.
Back in Manhattan, other films that have immortalized the
real Macy’s have been the George Cukor—directed made-in-New
York screwball comedy It Should Happen to You (1954), where
a newly famous Judy Holliday is mobbed by autograph hounds
while shopping for sheets; Auntie Mame (1958), which finds
Rosalind Russell, as the madcap Mame, trying to sell roller
skates at Macy’s at Christmastime; Love with the Proper
Stranger (1963), where Natalie Wood works in the pet department and where her love Steve McQueen draws quite a crowd
outside the store when he plays bagpipes at the end of the film
wearing a “Better Wed Than Dead” sign; The Group (1966), in
which Kay Strong, played by Joanna Pettet, rises up the retail

Natalie Wood, John Payne, and Macy’s Thanksgiving

Day Parade in

Miracle on 34th Street, 1947
LE

LS


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

a7

ladder as a Macy’s executive, only to find that corporate success
doesn’t necessarily mean happiness; and Radio Days (1987),
where Little Joe (who grows up to be Woody Allen) is treated to
a chemistry set in the toy department in the 1940s.
3. EMPIRE
350

STATE

Fifth

BUILDING

Avenue

Of all New York’s landmarks, none is as closely associated in the
popular imagination with one single film as is the Empire State
Building with the legendary monster movie King Kong. When
RKO released the picture in 1933, the Empire State Building was
barely two years old, but it had already made history as the
world’s tallest building. Soaring 1,250 feet into the air, this sleek
sandstone-and-steel structure stunned the world with its 102 stories, 87 elevators, 2 observation decks, and special mooring for
airships. Despite the impressiveness of its statistics, the Empire
State Building bombed when it first opened—the Depression was
in full swing and few firms were able to afford its offices. King
Kong, on the other hand, was a big box-office success and helped
fill RKO’s coffers for decades. In 1981, however, the tables were

turned when the now booming Empire State Building decided to
celebrate the great ape’s fiftieth birthday by flying an eight-storytall nylon balloon version of King Kong from its observation
tower. Alas, the aging superstar had a rather rough time of it. No
one could get him blown up properly; he kept springing leaks;
and finally he had to be taken down when high winds threatened
to blow away his half-inflated hulk. The whole fiasco became the
subject of ridicule in the newspapers and on the radio. The real
King Kong, by the way, was an eighteen-inch-tall, fur-covered
jointed metal skeleton designed by a pioneer in puppet animation
techniques named Willis O’Brien.
Besides King Kong, the Empire State Building has been used
in countless other films. Not only does its towering presence announce that we are definitely in the greatest city on earth, its
eighty-sixth-floor observation deck—usually re-created on a
soundstage in Hollywood—has traditionally provided one of the
screen’s most romantic rendezvous points. Think of all those
Love Affairs in which it’s played a pivotal role—from the 1939


38

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Metropolitan monsters; King Kong and the Empire State Building

Charles Boyer-Irene Dunne original to the 1957 Cary GrantDeborah Kerr remake (An Affair to Remember) to the 1994
Annette Bening—Warren Beatty version. The observation deck
has also been immortalized in The Clock (1945), On the Town
(1949), The Moon Is Blue (1953), and Sleepless in Seattle
(1993), where long-distance lovers Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan finally come face-to-face high above Manhattan. For Sleepless, the
building’s exterior and lobby shots were the real thing, but the
deck was aset in Seattle.
On a less romantic note, the Empire State Building’s distinctive spire takes on a much different significance in the 1991 film
Pimero, which

documents

the rise and fall of drug-addicted

avant-garde Puerto Rican playwright Miguel Pifero. As the playwright, played by Benjamin Bratt of Law & Order fame, becomes increasingly undermined by his demons, the spire, at first
so glamorous and seductive, comes to look ominously like a hypodermic needle.
Movie lovers wishing to visit the Empire State Building can do so
any day of the week between 9:30 a.m. and 11:30 p.m. For


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

39

information and prices, call 212-736-3100. In addition to the
romantic observation deck, it’s possible to take an elevator to the
circular, glassed-in observatory on the 102nd story. Visit

www.esbnyc.com.

4. MORGAN
211

COURT

Madison

Avenue

In architectural circles, an ultrathin high-rise is known as a sliver—
and in 1993, this thirty-three-foot-wide, thirty-two-story Murray
Hill apartment building provided housing for Sharon Stone as well
as the name of the movie she starred in. In Sliver, the address of the

building is given incorrectly—a frequent ploy of moviemakers to
confuse location spotters—as 113 East 38th Street. To further complicate matters, the entrance used in the film was a much more photogenic and camera-friendly faux-glass affair created just for the
film out of the sliver’s rear entrance on 36th Street.

Morgan Court, the
“sliver” of an apartment

building used in S/iver,

1993


NEW

40

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

The New York Public Library

5. NEW
455

YORK
Fifth

PUBLIC

LIBRARY

Avenue

One of the city’s most impressive Beaux Arts buildings, this 1911
masterpiece is especially known for the two gigantic marble lions
that guard its grand staircase. In a long-forgotten 1935 Claudette
Colbert film, the library steps provide the regular popcornmunching spot for Colbert and her buddy Fred MacMurray; the
scenes involved a combination of Hollywood studio sets and real
NYC footage. The same was true when the library appeared in
Vincente Minnelli’s The Clock (1945), during Judy Garland and

Robert Walker’s forty-eight-hour whirlwind visit to Manhattan
before soldier-on-leave Walker has to report back to the base... .
and again in MGM’s On the Town (1949). The library can also
be seen in the original Ghostbusters (1984), as the site of a ghostbusting operation that involved ridding the place of a phantom

librarian who was causing trouble in the stacks. In the remake of
The Thomas Crown Affair (2000), the library masqueraded as
the grand foyer of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, which refused to allow any part of its property to be used in a film that


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

41

involved an art heist. In Spider-Man (2002), the library was the
dramatic backdrop for the scene where Tobey “Spider-Man”
Maguire is dropped off by his uncle (Cliff Robertson), who is
later shot and killed by carjackers at the same landmark Midtown location.
Behind the library is Bryant Park, a beautifully landscaped
space with gravel walkways, folding garden chairs, and park
benches. The park looks positively Parisian in Manhattan Murder Mystery (1993), when amateur sleuth Diane Keaton reports
on her latest caper to her husband, Woody Allen, in front of the
park’s gushing fountain. Bryant Park is also the site of one of
New York City’s most glittering biannual events—Fashion
Week—which sees top designers parade their latest frocks in
fashion shows within huge tents; the scene is well documented in
Unzipped (1995), an insider’s look at the wacky world of fashion designer Isaac Mizrahi, who lately has become a bit player in
Woody Allen’s stable, having appeared in Celebrity (1998), Small
Time Crooks (2000), and Hollywood Ending (2002).
Visit www.nyplorg.

Diane Keaton and Woody Allen at the Bryant Park fountain in Manhattan
Murder Mystery, 1993
ppm

RF RE

NE ET NS FN

OPE EEE


42

NEW

6. DYLAN

HOTEL

52

41st

East

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Street

For some six months in 2002, this chic boutique hotel was much
in the news as the site of pop-star Britney Spears’s Nyla restaurant. Like many rising celebrities such as Jennifer Lopez, who is
the principal backer of the popular Pasadena eatery Madre’s,
Spears was attracted by the restaurant business to further cement
her celebrity and further enrich her coffers. She was not as lucky
as Lopez, however, for Nyla seems to have been cursed from the
get-go, with some five hundred fans jeering Spears on the establishment’s rain-soaked opening night, when the diva arrived
ninety minutes late and shot inside without even a wave to the
crowd. As the months went on, Nyla was plagued with hygiene
violations, morale problems among its staff, and serious financial issues. Six months after its opening, Spears severed her connection with the place, after which she was sued by a group of
creditors who claimed the celebrity eatery owed them some
$44,000. Nyla closed soon thereafter, but despite its failure, it
nonetheless lasted somewhat longer than Spears’s January 2004
wedding to hometown pal Jason Allen Alexander, which was annulled a mere fifty-five hours after it took place. For the nuptials,
held at Las Vegas’s Little White Wedding Chapel, the bride wore
torn jeans and a baseball cap.
7. GRAND
89

East

CENTRAL
42nd

TERMINAL

Street

Back in the glory days of Hollywood, during the 1930s and
1940s, if you were heading from New York to the West Coast,
chances were Grand Central Terminal was where you would
have begun your journey. And the train that you would have
taken was the legendary Twentieth Century Limited, which traveled overnight to Chicago, where passengers would then board
the Super Chief for the rest of their westward trek. The Twentieth Century left Grand Central every evening at around six
o’clock from track 34, where a red carpet would be rolled out for
departing passengers. Making their way down that carpet might
have been Marlene Dietrich or Joan Crawford, with two or three


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

43

redcaps in tow to handle their voluminous baggage. Both stars,
according to former Grand Central redcap Oswald S. Throne,
were good tippers, as was Mae West, who not only traveled with
lots of luggage, but with five or six male “escorts” as well!
Alas, times and travel styles have changed. The Twentieth
Century bit the dust in the mid-1960s, and Grand Central, which
once was home to a number of other glamorous, long-distance
trains, caters mostly to commuters these days. Still, Grand Central’s glorious 1913 Beaux Arts terminal building—with its massive marble staircase, seventy-five-foot-high windows, and
twinkling-star-studded ceiling—remains one of New York City’s
most dramatic public spaces. Grand Central is also a triumph of
preservation. In the 1970s, it narrowly escaped “radical alterations” planned by developers who wanted to build a high-rise
office building on top of it. Thanks to the commitment of concerned citizens—including the late Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis,
who organized a grassroots campaign to ensure its landmark

NYC super station: Grand Central
aaa

EE

EY


44

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

status—this didn’t happen, and it has since been magnificently
restored.
Over the years, Grand Central (or Hollywood facsimiles
thereof) has appeared in many movies. In 1934, the landmark
station was the final location for Twentieth Century, the Colum-

bia Pictures comedy about a Broadway producer (John Barrymore) and his protégée (Carole Lombard), much of which takes
place aboard the train of the same name, and all of which was
shot in Hollywood. Meanwhile, old-movie lovers can spot
MGM’°s version of Grand Central in Going Hollywood (1933)
and The Thin Man Goes Home (1944). In the latter, Asta breaks
loose in the terminal at rush hour and a very hungover Nick
Charles (William Powell) has one hell of a time retrieving the
pooch.
By the 1950s, however, going on location had become the
rage. Thus, when Cary Grant needed to make a fast escape from
New York City aboard the Twentieth Century, in North by
Northwest (1959), director Alfred Hitchcock shot the sequence
at night inside the real station. In 1965, director John Frankenheimer also used the real thing when he shot the opening sequence of the thriller Seconds at Grand Central, which tells the
story of an aging businessman (John Randolph) who gets a new
lease on life (and into big trouble) after plastic surgery that turns
him into Rock Hudson. Other thrillers to use the dramatic terminal to great effect have been A Stranger Is Watching (1982),
in which a psychopath holds a mother and child captive in a secret Grand Central cavern; Peter Yates’s The House on Carroll
Street (1988), which lensed its spectacular climax on location at
the station; and A Shock to the System (1990), which shows
businessman-commuter Michael Caine morphing into a murderer after a younger coworker beats him out of a promotion.
Another famous Grand Central commuter was Richard Gere,
who rode Metro North from Westchester to his job in Manhattan in Unfaithful (2002), whereas his wife Diane Lane traveled
the same route (later in the day) to hook up with her hot young
stud in Downtown Manhattan. Gere and Lane came to Grand
Central under decidedly different circumstances in Francis Ford
Coppola’s The Cotton Club (1984), when at the end of the film
Gere gets the gangster’s girlfriend (Lane), and the two of them


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

45

take off for Hollywood aboard the Twentieth Century Limited.
One of the most romantic Grand Central moments ever, however, is in The Fisher King (1991), when Robin Williams and

Amanda Plummer magically turn the whole place into a glittering ballroom.
Other notable films to use Grand Central include Midnight
Run (1988), Loose Cannons (1990), Carlito’s Way (1993), Hackers (1995), One Fine Day (1996), Extreme Measures (1996),

Conspiracy Theory (1997), and Tadpole (2003). And finally, a
trio of films with great fake Grand Central sequences: Beneath
the Planet of the Apes (1970), which featured a well art-directed,
postapocalyptic Grand Central; the original Superman (1978),
where the spectacular scenes of archvillain Lex Luthor’s fantastic subterranean Grand Central palazzo were all done on a
soundstage at a London movie studio; and Sergio Leone’s saga of
Jewish gangsters, Once Upon a Time in America (1984), whose

Grand Central scenes were actually shot at Paris’s Gare du Nord,
proving that one good gare deserves another.
Besides serving as an important movie location, Grand Central once had a CBS television studio on one of its upper stories,
and the early dramatic series Man Against Crime, starring Ralph
Bellamy, was broadcast live from here between 1949 and 1952.
Sponsored by Camel cigarettes, the program always showed the
good guys smoking, and never allowed its bad guys asingle puff!
Today, the old CBS studio is now a tennis club that charges over

$100 an hour for a court.
Movie lovers who want to see Grand Central Terminal close-up—

the building is loaded with intriguing nooks, crannies, catwalks,
and a glamorous, relatively new food court—can take the walking
tour sponsored by the Municipal Art Society that is given every
Wednesday at 12:30 p.m. The tour meets in front of the main
information kiosk on the Main Concourse—and it’s free, although

donations are appreciated. All aboard!
Visit www.grandcentralterminal.com.


NEW

46

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Divine Deco: Chrysler
Building

8. CHRYSLER
405

BUILDING

Lexington

Avenue

It must be one of New York City movie director Sidney Lumet’s
favorite skyscrapers because in The Wiz, when Diana Ross and

Michael Jackson ease on down the road into Lumet’s fantasy version of Manhattan as the Emerald City of Oz, no less than five
Chrysler Buildings pop up on the horizon—and not one Empire
State Building! Woody Allen, who once said, “There are very few
modern skyscrapers that I like,” nevertheless includes the 1931
Chrysler Building on the itinerary of the architectural tour of
Manhattan that Sam Waterston gives in Allen’s Hannah and Her
Sisters—whereas the Empire State Building is noticeably absent.
And when Dustin Hoffman points out major Manhattan land-


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

47

marks to his son in Robert Benton’s Kramer vs. Kramer, the

Chrysler Building tops the list.

}

More recently, in Two Weeks Notice (2002), Hugh Grant and
Sandra Bullock circle the building in a helicopter, while Grant
tells of the famous rivalry in the late 1920s between the Chrysler
Building’s architect William Van Allen and his former partner
H. Craig Severence to build the world’s tallest building. (Severence, who was working on the Manhattan Company Building at
40 Wall Street, lost—and both men were overshadowed a few
years later when the Empire State Building made its debut.) And
when Ridley Scott wants to symbolize Manhattan at its most
glamorous in Someone to Watch Over Me, he dazzles us with

nighttime views of this glorious 1930s high-rise. What is it about
the Chrysler Building that’s so appealing? Its six-story Art Deco
spire? Its huge chrome gargoyles (one of which provides the
steely opening image for the 1990 film version of Tom Wolfe’s
The Bonfire of the Vanities), which were designed to look like
1931 Chrysler hood ornaments? Or simply the fact that there
will never be another building quite like this one?
The Chrysler Building’s meatiest film role may well have been
in a campy made-in-Manhattan monster movie called Q, about
a gigantic mythological bird that comes to life and flies about
zapping hard hats, window washers, penthouse sunbathers, and
various other high-level New Yorkers. The creature’s nest? You
guessed it... the spire of the Chrysler Building. With its inane
plot and over-the-top performances by Michael Moriarty, David
Carradine, Candy Clarke, and Richard Roundtree, Q is a treat
not just for cult-film buffs, but for architecture lovers too, because it features lots of shots of the Chrysler Building’s sleek
lobby of Moroccan marble and stainless steel and also provides
rare close-up glimpses of the skyscraper’s distinctive spire from
every conceivable angle.
9. THE
220

NEWS
East

BUILDING
42nd

Street

Christopher Reeve and Margot Kidder stopped traffic back in
1977 when they emerged from the lobby of the then Daily News
Building, during the filming of Superman. In this big-budget
movie version of the famous comic strip, the landmark 1930 of-


48

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Margot Kidder/Lois Lane in
the Daily News/Daily Planet
lobby for Superman, 1978

fice building of a great metropolitan newspaper, the Daily News,
doubled as the headquarters for the legendary Daily Planet.
Especially striking, both in the Superman film and in real life, is
the twelve-foot globe that revolves under a spectacular blackglass cupola in the lobby of the building, which is now simply the
News Building, since the Daily News relocated to West 33rd
Street in the 1990s. Movie lovers may also recall the thrilling helicopter crash that supposedly took place on the roof of the Daily
Planet Building, leaving Lois Lane/Margot Kidder dangling from
the side of the structure. Those sequences were a triumph of special effects—not location shooting.
10.

SCREEN

GEMS

STUDIOS

222

44th

Street

East

Unlike Hollywood, where most of the film and TV facilities are
concentrated in large studio buildings and complexes, New York
constantly surprises with its many small studios dotted across the
city. A case in point is this CBS-run soundstage, currently home
to the soap opera The Guiding Light. Among the New York actors who performed on this venerable soap early in their careers
are Kevin Bacon, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Allison Janney, Mira
Sorvino, and JoBeth Williams.
Visit www.screengemsstudios.com.


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

11. HBO

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

49

'

1100

Avenue

of

the

Americas

The daring cable network that frequently leaves the big television
networks in the dust—with sophisticated, edgy, and frequently
sexually explicit series like Sex and the City, Six Feet Under, and
The Sopranos—has its New York City base here. Besides TV series, HBO

is known

for its award-winning TV movies, mini-

series, and docudramas. Among them are Band of Brothers, And
the Band Played On, Barbarians at the Gate, Gotti, Truman,
Gia, Citizen Cohn, Winchell, and Angels in America.
Visit www.hbo.com.

12. ALGONQUIN
59

West

44th

HOTEL
Street

A hotel that is a literary landmark, the Algonquin will always be
linked to an irreverent group of Manhattan intellectuals, known
as the Round Table, who hung out in its Oak Room and later in its
Rose Room in the 1920s and 1930s. The crew included critics
Alexander Woollcott and Robert Benchley, playwright George S.
Kaufman, essayist and short-story writer Dorothy Parker, humorist Ring Lardner, actress Tallulah Bankhead, and New Yorker
editor Harold Ross (who is said to have put together the magazine
at the hotel rather than in its offices across the street). Although
most of the Round Table held the movies, and especially Hollywood, in disdain, many of them eventually developed pretty
strong ties with the film industry when the studios offered one of
the best sources of employment for writers during the Depression.
Of the elite Algonquin group, Dorothy Parker wound up spending
the most time in Hollywood, where she worked on the screenplays
for such classic films as David O. Selznick’s 1937 A Star Is Born
(for which she shared an Oscar with her coauthor husband Alan
Campbell) and Hitchcock’s 1944 espionage thriller Saboteur.
It was also in 1944 that Hollywood immortalized the Algonquin’s Rose Room with Otto Preminger’s quirky murder
mystery Laura, featuring a scene set in the historic dining room
where the Round Table held forth. Laura’s Rose Room, of

course, was a facsimile created on a soundstage at Twentieth


0

4g

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER'S

GUIDE

Century-Fox, but when director Alan Rudolph immortalized the
Round Table in his 1994 Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle,

although the film was mainly shot in Montreal for budgetary
reasons, the real Algonquin was one of the few New York
City locations used for the picture. Jennifer Jason Leigh played
Parker, with Peter Gallagher as her handsome husband Alan
Campbell; other Round Table members were Campbell Scott as
Robert Benchley, Matthew Broderick as Charles MacArthur, and
Sam Robards as Harold Ross.
Another film that featured the Algonquin playing itself was
9% Weeks, where it was one of the spots where Mickey Rourke
and Kim Basinger engaged in kinky sex in the 1986 Adrian Lyne
feature. Five years earlier the hotel had been the scene of an
amusing literary-sexual encounter in George Cukor’s Rich and
Famous. In the film, neurotic writer Jacqueline Bisset is giving a
tour of the Algonquin, along with a history of the Round Table,
to a much younger man she has just picked up and is about to
escort up to her room.

\

The Algonquin Hotel’s legendary Rose Room
I

a

a

ESET


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

51

This was all a far cry from a century ago, when it was in the
Algonquin’s lobby—a cozy clutter of Victorian armchairs, sofas,
and coffee tables—that Douglas Fairbanks first wooed Mary
Pickford back in the 1910s. Fairbanks, who kept a suite at the
Algonquin from 1907 to 1915, was the first of many film stars
who thought of the Algonquin as home. Other legendary habitués were Audrey Hepburn, Billy Wilder, Sir Laurence Olivier,
Yves Montand, and Melina Mercouri—all of whom loved the

Algonquin for its proximity to the theater district, its lobby so
perfect for cocktails and/or a proper British tea, its chandelierhung dining room that serves old-fashioned hotel food like
chicken pot pie and calf’s liver with bacon. Happily, despite the
current rage for minimalist hotels, here at the Algonquin, very
little has changed.
Visit www.algonquinhotel.com.

13.

HOTEL
49

West

IROQUOIS
44th

Street

Not nearly as historic or fashionable as its next-door neighbor,
the Algonquin, the Iroquois can nonetheless claim a young actor
named James Dean as a former resident. This was during the
dawn of his New York career back in the early 1950s, when the
only acting job he could manage to find was as a guinea pig testing out the wacky stunts for the producers of the popular TV
game show Beat the Clock. At the Iroquois, Dean occupied room
number 802, which he shared with fellow actor William Bast. In
those days, both guys, if they were meeting someone they
deemed important, would arrange to see them next door in the
lobby of the Algonquin. Today, the same ploy is no longer necessary, because the Iroquois has been considerably spiffed up
since its James Dean days.
Visit www. iroquo/sny.com.


52

14.

NEW

ROYALTON
44

West

YORK:

THE

MOVTE

*lOV'IER’S?

GUIIDIE

HOTEL

44th

Street

One of Manhattan’s hippest hostelries, the Royalton debuted in
1988 as the brainchild of ex—Studio 54 ex-cons Jan Schrager and
Steve Rubell. With the help of iiber-designer Philippe Starck, they
took over an aging hotel on West 44th Street and made it the last
word in minimal decor and maximum profile. Immediately the
stars of New York publishing flocked to its restaurant—Vanity
Fair’s Tina Brown, Vogue’s Anna Wintour, and the late fashion

doyenne of the New York Times Carrie Donovan. The supermodels all hung out here, too—Linda, Christy, Cindy-—in the
days when they reigned on the covers of all the major fashion
magazines before being dethroned by beautiful young movie
stars. The hotel was also used for premiere parties for such films
as This Boy’s Life (1993), which brought Leonardo DiCaprio to
the hotel for the first of many visits and interviews over the
years. Today, the Royalton is still a happening place to stay and
play, but the initial buzz is decidedly more muffled. Still, when
the 2001

Tom

Cruise film Vanilla Sky, set in the publishing

world, needed an appropriately insider location for a hotel scene,
they went with the Royalton.
Visit www.ianschragerhotels.com.

15.

SCREEN
360

ACTORS

Madison

GUILD

Avenue

Like most professionals, movie actors have a labor union. The
twelfth floor of this Madison Avenue high-rise is headquarters
for the New York City offices of the Screen Actors Guild (SAG).
Out of a total of 118,000 members nationwide, some 29,000 ac-

tors belong to SAG in the New York metropolitan area. For a
day’s work ina theatrical film, the 2004 SAG minimum base rate
was $678 for a day (featured) player and $115 for an extra. But
before you think of rushing into the film business, be advised
that 80 to 85 percent of SAG’s New York members make under
$9,000 a year from their screen appearances.
Visit WwWw.sag.org.


MIDTOWN

16.

MANHATTAN:

METROPOLITAN
200

Park

ARCHETYPAL

LIFE

NYC

53

BUILDING

Avenue

One of New York’s first precast concrete skyscrapers, this Park
Avenue landmark sparked a great deal of controversy when it
came on the scene in 1963, since it blocked views up and down
Manhattan’s most elite street. The work of legendary Bauhaus
architect Walter Gropius, who collaborated with various other
architects on the project, it was named the Pan Am Building for
the once grand, now defunct airline that was headquartered here
for almost twenty-five years. The structure’s stunning marble
lobby, with its dramatic public art works and floating escalator
banks, was featured in the 1968 film No Way to Treat a Lady,
where serial-killer Rod Steiger uses the marble phone banks in
the lobby to phone police headquarters, outraged that a strangulation victim has been attributed to him when it was the work of
a copycat. Other 1960 films that took advantage of the then new
building’s cachet include On a Clear Day You Can See Forever
(1970), where Yves Montand sings “Come Back to Me” to a distant Barbra Streisand from the rooftop of the sixty-five-story
building in the Vincente Minnelli-directed musical; and
Coogan’s Bluff (1968), which has western sheriff Clint Eastwood
arriving in NYC ina helicopter that lands atop the Pan Am
Building’s famous heliport, which enabled travelers to hop from
JFK to Midtown Manhattan in a matter of minutes. In 1977,
however, those days came to an end when a helicopter flipped
over and its rotors broke off, killing four people on the roof—
including porn film director Michael Findlay, known for classics
like Wet and Wild (1976) and The Curse of Her Flesh (1968)—
and one person on the ground.
More recently, the former Pan Am Building—complete with
its old sign—turns up in Catch Me If You Can. In the film,
which is set in the 1960s, con man Leonardo DiCaprio, in his efforts to impersonate an airline pilot, phones Pan Am from a
booth outside the building to find out who supplies their uniforms.


YORK:

NEW

54

17. NEWS
1211

CORP.
Avenue

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

BUILDING
of the

Americas

In 1985, Australian publishing mogul Rupert Murdoch went
shopping for a movie company to add to his growing portfolio
of U.S. media acquisitions. He bought the venerable studio
Twentieth Century-Fox and for a while in the early 1990s even
ran it himself, when then CEO Barry Diller resigned. Today,
Murdoch’s News Corp. empire includes not only the Fox movie
division but Fox News, HarperCollins publishers, the New York
Post, the London Times, and the Sky cable network—and that’s

just the beginning. Murdoch’s prime New York base of operations is here on Sixth Avenue, where the hyper-fit septuagenarian
recently built a large gym to encourage his staff to be as healthy
as he is. Vanity Fair put Murdoch at the very top of its 2003 list
of the fifty most important media people in America; in 2004 he
fell to the number-two spot.
Visit www.newscorp.com.

18

RADIO

CITY

MUSIC

HALL

1260

Avenue

of the

Americas

It advertised 6,200 seats, but the total has always been closer to
5,960. Still, when Radio City Music Hall opened in 1932 as part
of New York’s futuristic Rockefeller Center complex, it was the

largest indoor theater in the world. And today it still is. Everything about Radio City Music Hall is outsized—from its sixtyfoot-high foyer to its two-ton chandeliers (the largest in the
world) to its Wurlitzer organ (the mightiest on earth, with fiftysix separate sets of pipes).

While many people assume that this great Art Deco theater
started out as a movie palace, Radio City Music Hall was actually planned for spectacular stage shows, whereas the now defunct Center Theater on the next block was to have been
Rockefeller Center’s main venue for films. When the Music
Hall’s six-hour opening-night program bombed, however, the
enormous theater quickly turned to the formula that would spell
its success for the next three decades: a thirty-minute stage show


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

55

Postcard view of Radio City Music Hall stage

combined with a first-run family movie. More than just a commercial success, Radio City Music Hall—with its high-kicking
Rockettes, spectacular Christmas and Easter pageants, and topnotch movies—became an entertainment landmark of New York
City, a must on every visitor’s list of things to see and do.
Not only has it played a role as an important site for the New
York premieres of more than six hundred films like Mr. Smith
Goes to Washington (1939), An American in Paris (1951), and

Singin’ in the Rain (1952), the hall has also wound up being featured in a number of films including The Godfather (1972), Annie
(1982), Radio Days (1987), and Alfred Hitchcock’s Saboteur
(1942), in which Robert Cummings runs across a Hollywood
mock-up of the Radio City stage while a film is being shown. Since

a gunfight is taking place on screen, the audience at first doesn’t
realize that a real gun is being fired at Cummings in the theater.
Radio City’s glory days ended in the 1960s. For one thing, the
studios had started mass-releasing films by then, making it next
to impossible for Radio City still to boast first-runs. Also, America’s tastes had changed. Family films were out of fashion in the
1960s and 1970s, and the Rockettes kicking up their heels were
considered high camp, not mass entertainment. By 1978, Radio
City was losing millions of dollars a year, and the Rockefeller


56

NEW:

YORK?

TPFHE

"MOVIE

HOME

Rss) G UNDE

Group, its parent company, decided to close it down. A white elephant, the grand Art Deco entertainment palace was earmarked
for demolition. Happily, a citizens group managed to get the interior of the Music Hall declared a historic landmark and management set about finding new uses for the mega-auditorium.
And so, these days, Radio City Music Hall hosts everyone and
everything from rock and pop stars and groups (Madonna, Sting,
the Rolling Stones, Grateful Dead, Bette Midler, Liza Minnelli,
Tina Turner, Janet Jackson, Celine Dion, Whitney Houston, Stevie Wonder) to trade shows and awards shows (the Tony Awards,
MTV Music Awards, ESPY Awards) to TV specials and its own

classic Christmas and Easter extravaganzas. And, while movies
no longer play a major role in Radio City’s life, special screenings
still go on here from time to time, such as the New York premieres of Disney’s The Lion King (1994) and the 1983 New York
first showing of the restored version of the Judy Garland/James
Mason A Star Is Born, which featured the “lost” twenty-four

minutes that had been cut from the film by Jack Warner back in
1954. Radio City is also where Francis Ford Coppola first unveiled his reconstructed version of Abel Gance’s 1927 silentscreen epic Napoleon before New York audiences. The music for
the revived film was composed by Coppola’s father, Carmine.
Movie lovers can experience the splendor of the Radio City Music
Hall either by attending a performance or by taking an hour-long

backstage tour of the place. Tours are given daily at frequent
intervals, they depart from the Main Lobby. Call 212-247-4777 and

ask for the Tour Desk, or visit www.radiocity.com.

19.

ROCKEFELLER
48th

to

52nd

CENTER
Streets

between

Fifth

and

Sixth

Avenues

It makes for one hell of an establishing shot: a long pan down the
seventy stories of the RCA Building to the gigantic gilded statue
of Prometheus backed by a row of fluttering flags and spurting
jets of water. Hold on the statue, then pull back and angle down
to reveal a huge outdoor café—or, if it’s winter, an ice skating
rink. Pull back farther to include a long courtyard studded with
a series of lavishly planted mini-gardens. Or do the whole se-


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

Si)

quence in reverse. Rockefeller Center, which the American Institute of Architects’ AIA Guide to New York City calls “an island
of architectural excellence . . . the greatest urban complex of the
twentieth century,” is so beautifully laid out, so well proportioned, so perfect that it’s hard to make it look anything less than
extraordinary, no matter how you shoot it. Used in the movies,
a shot of Rockefeller Center—as in Nothing Sacred (1937), How
to Marry a Millionaire (1953), or Manhattan

(1979)—estab-

lishes New York at its best: a perfectly balanced combination of
power, glamor, and humanity.
Add the skating rink—especially when backed by the most
renowned Christmas tree in America—and we see Midtown
Manhattan at its most romantic in films such as Desk Set (1957),
Sunday in New York (1963), 40 Carats (1973), Home Alone 2
(1992), and Autumn in New York (2000). Or focus on the fore-

court of the center’s Atlas Building at 630 Fifth Avenue—with its
dramatic statue of the Greek god Atlas holding the world on his
shoulders—and you enhance the already powerful image of this
serious office building, which has been used as the talent agency

On the Town at Rockefeller Center: Frank Sinatra, Jules Munshin, Gene

Kelly, 1949


58

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

that could change violinist John Garfield’s life in the 1947 Joan
Crawford melodrama Humoresque; the magical spot where hasbeen journalist Bruce Willis is given the tip for a sensational
story that will jump-start his sagging career in the 1990 film
version of Tom Wolfe’s blockbuster novel The Bonfire of the
Vanities; and the newspaper where Gregory Peck has gone undercover to do his big story on anti-Semitism in Elia Kazan’s
Gentleman’s Agreement (1947). Especially memorable in this
film is the scene where Peck, echoing his own emotional state,
explains the burden Atlas is shouldering to his young son. On the
other hand, in Hercules in New York (1970), Arnold Schwarzenegger (under the stage name of Arnold Strong), in the title
role, not only knows who Atlas is, but says the statue is not a
good representation of his fellow muscleman.
Besides the many films that use Rockefeller Center as background, two recent features have focused on a unique aspect of
its history. When Rockefeller Center was being built, the famous
Mexican artist Diego Rivera was commissioned to do the murals
in the then RCA (now GE) Building at 30 Rockefeller Plaza. But
when it was discovered the left-wing Rivera had included and refused to delete a likeness of Lenin, hypercapitalist John D. Rockefeller fired Rivera and brought in artist José Maria Sert to do a
whole new set of paintings. The incident is referenced both in
The Cradle Will Rock (1999), Tim Robbins’s homage to leftwing New York of the 1930s, and in Frida (2002), a biopic produced by and starring Salma Hayek as Rivera’s artist wife, Frida
Kahlo. In the film Edward Norton plays Rockefeller and Alfred
Molina is Rivera.
Conceived and founded by John D. Rockefeller, the twelve
high-, middle-, and low-rise buildings that comprised the original Rockefeller Center were built between 1930 and 1940. The
centerpiece of the complex is the seventy-story GE Building (formerly the RCA Building). When Rockefeller first envisioned his
urban center in the 1920s, his plan was to provide a new home
for the Metropolitan Opera House (it was on Broadway at 38th
Street at the time) to be surrounded by office, retail, entertainment, and dining facilities. When the Depression hit in 1929, the
Met decided that it couldn’t afford to move, so Rockefeller and
his advisers decided to build an office tower instead of an opera


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

D9

house. At the same time, the Radio Corporation of America and
its subsidiary, the National Broadcasting Company, were among
the few companies in the country that were prospering despite
the Depression. Looking for a corporate headquarters to suit
their growing needs and power, RCA/NBC found a classy home
at Rockefeller Center and became the principal tenant of the
handsome skyscraper at 30 Rockefeller Plaza, which opened in
1933 bearing the RCA name (which was changed to GE in the
1980s, reflecting RCA/NBC’s new owner General Electric).
For the radio and television lover, 30 Rockefeller Plaza—

which still houses NBC’s principal New York radio and TV studios—is one of the most historic sites in the country connected
with these media. Television literally came of age here beginning
in 1935, when NBC started broadcasting two programs a week
from studio 3H. These first telecasts consisted of plays, comedians, scenes from opera, cooking demonstrations (limited to
salads because the intense heat from the then necessary ultrahigh-powered TV lights made stovetop cooking unthinkable),
and even live transmissions from the streets of New York thanks
to a mobile unit that went into operation in 1937. Despite these
experiments, it wasn’t until after World War II that TV really got
off the ground. Then, too, NBC was at the forefront of the
medium with such programs as Kraft Television Theatre (1947),
Howdy Doody (1947), the John Cameron Swayze-anchored
Camel News Caravan (1947), Meet the Press (1947), and Milton
Berle’s Texaco Star Theatre (1948)—most of which were tele-

vised from Radio City.
In 1952, NBC took a bold step in early-morning programming by introducing a two-hour show that mixed news, interviews, and entertainment features. The host of NBC’s new Today
show was alaid-back gentleman named Dave Garroway and one
of his sidekicks was a chimpanzee named J. Fred Muggs. Instead
of using a studio in 30 Rockefeller Plaza, however, the Today
show was done live from a spacious Rockefeller Center showroom with street-to-ceiling picture windows on the south side of
West 49th Street just west of Rockefeller Plaza. Passersby pressed
their noses up against the glass to watch the live TV production
going on inside, and at various times each morning the camera
was turned on the gawkers. Soon Today not only became a hit


NEW

60

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

television show, it became a major New York City tourist attraction. In the 1960s, Today revamped its studios, and its old 49th
Street base was turned into a bank. In 1994, however, Today not
only returned to a street-level studio at 10 Rockefeller Plaza, it
started shooting out on the plaza itself—and sign-carrying spectators line up well before dawn in hopes of prime places and possible close-ups.
For TV lovers, an early-morning visit to the Today show can
be followed by the fifty-five-minute NBC Studio Tour. Among the
attractions of this behind-the-scenes look at Radio City are studio
8H, the Saturday Night Live auditorium as well as the site of such
classic early TV shows as Your Hit Parade, What’s My Line, and
the Kraft Television Theatre. The tour also takes television lovers
to Studio 6A, where Late Night with Conan O’Brien is taped,
and lets them participate in the NBC Experience, where, among
other interactive displays, they can be interviewed by Jay Leno or
Conan O’Brien on video. And, if they’re lucky, NBC Studio Tour
guests might also catch glimpses of the real Conan as well as
other current NBC celebrities such as Katie Couric, Matt Lauer,
and Tom Brokaw, who all work in the building.
The.NBC Studio Tour is currently given daily at fifteen-minute

intervals. Tours leave from the NBC Tour Desk on the main floor of
30 Rockefeller Plaza; admission is currently $17.75 for adults, $15
for seniors and children from six to sixteen. No one under six. Call
212-664-3700.

To buy tickets online, go to htto:/nbc-television-

studio-tourvisit-new-york-city.com.

20.

THE
49

RAINBOW
West

49th

ROOM
Street

With its glorious views, its revolving dance floor, and its stunning
Art Deco interiors, Rockefeller Center’s sixty-fifth-story Rainbow Room was the last word in New York City nightlife when
it opened in 1934. Over the years, as supper clubs went in and
out of fashion, the magnificent venue has had various incarnations, the most recent being the classy cabaret nightclub Rainbow and Stars, which featured such legends as Liza Minnelli and
the late Rosemary Clooney. Currently open for dinner and danc-


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

61

ing just one evening a week (usually Fridays), the old Rainbow
Room space is now managed by the chic Venetian Cipriani
organization, which also runs the posh Rainbow Grill restaurant
in the space’s former Promenade Bar. Meanwhile, movie lovers
can also catch the Rainbow Room in all its glory in The
Prince of Tides (1991), where Barbra Streisand dances with Nick
Nolte; Six Degrees of Separation (1993), where Will Smith
dances with Eric Thall (and is asked to leave); and Sleepless in
Seattle (1993), where Meg Ryan breaks her engagement to Bill

Pullman.
For information and reservations, call 212-632-5100; visit

www.cipriani.com/srainbowroom.html.

21.

CBS

BUILDING

485

Madison

Avenue

In the beginning there was NBC... and only NBC. Then, in
1927, a new radio network called the Columbia Phonograph
Broadcasting System came along to challenge the National
Broadcasting Corporation’s monopoly of the airwaves. The new
network had a rough go of it initially. When its owners, the Columbia Phonograph Record Company, backed out, a young cigar
magnate named William S. Paley stepped in, shortened the network’s name to the Columbia Broadcasting System, and perked
up its credit rating by getting powerful Paramount Pictures to
come in on the deal. Thus it was with great pride and much fanfare that, in the autumn of 1929, Mr. Paley cut the ribbon for
CBS’s headquarters in the brand-new Columbia Broadcasting
Building at the corner of Madison Avenue and 52nd Street.
CBS occupied the top five floors of the impressive new
twenty-four-story structure and had fifteen studios on the
premises; these ranged from tiny chambers to an auditorium

large enough to hold 250 performers. Some of the studios were
equipped with glassed-off, soundproof balconies to accommodate spectators for early radio shows, and one studio was set up
for what everyone knew was coming sooner or later: television.
Indeed, many important early experiments in television took
place in the CBS Building in the 1930s. In those days performers


NEW

62

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

had to wear garish makeup, and the primitive camera, with its
high-powered spotlight, practically blinded the actors after just a
couple of seconds in front of it.
But it was radio that was responsible for CBS’s great success
in the 1930s and 1940s. As the country’s number-two network,
CBS devoted most of its energies to its radio programming in
order to catch up with top-ranked NBC. Meanwhile, NBC was
so convinced that television was just around the corner that it let
its radio division slide as it moved full speed ahead on the development of TV. Thus, by the end of the 1930s, CBS—with a
strong news division that included pros like Edward R. Murrow
and Eric Sevareid, and equally impressive dramatic programming that featured the talents of Orson Welles and Archibald
MacLeish—was a force to be reckoned with. When World War
II erupted and further delayed the coming of television, CBS’s position in the industry was made even stronger.
CBS and Mr. Paley stayed at 485 Madison Avenue for thirtysix years. When the network moved into its current headquarters
at 52nd Street and the Avenue of the Americas in 1965, it was
Mr. Paley who, in the tradition of ships’ captains, was the last
person to leave 485 Madison Avenue. Paley died in 1990.
22.

BLACK
51

West

ROCK
52nd

Street

Known as Black Rock, this thirty-eight-story Eero Saarinen—designed skyscraper of Canadian black granite has been the corporate headquarters of CBS since 1965. No longer an independent
company, CBS is currently part of the massive media conglomerate Viacom, which also counts Paramount Pictures, MTV, Showtime, and VH1 among its family members. Viacom paid a cool
$40.6 billion to acquire CBS in 1995.
In 1977, Black Rock was featured in the film Exorcist II: The

Heretic. In this lame follow-up to the famous supernatural
thriller, the formerly possessed Regan MacNeil (Linda Blair) is
now living in New York in her actress mother’s posh penthouse,

which supposedly is in Black Rock. Director John Boorman used
this high-up location for numerous
scenes.

vertigo-inducing

terrace


MIDTOWN

23.

MANHATTAN:

MUSEUM

OF

25

52nd

West

ARCHETYPAL

TELEVISION

AND

NYC

63

RADIO

Street

The brainchild of CBS founding father, the late William S. Paley,

the Museum of Television and Radio was founded in 1976 as the
Museum of Broadcasting. The first institution to be dedicated
exclusively to the preservation, cataloguing, and showcasing of
radio and television art, the museum

has accumulated

over

100,000 television and radio programs in its archives. Open to
media scholars and fans alike, the museum provides custom-built
private viewing consoles where individuals can screen the titles
they have requested from the museum’s computerized database.
Besides providing an opportunity for individuals to explore
radio/TV history firsthand, the museum has a program of TV
and video screenings, which it presents in two theaters and two
screening rooms. These can be anything from an examination of
James Dean’s career in early television to Sex and the City
marathons to “Sound and Vision: David Bowie on Television.”
A sign of the museum’s success is the fact that it opened a Beverly Hills branch in 1996.
The Museum

of Television and Radio is open

Tuesdays to Sundays,

from 12 noon to 6 p.m. Suggested contributions: $10.00 for adults;
$8.00 for studentsenior citizens; $5.00 for children under
thirteen. Call 212-621-6800 or visit www.mtrorg.

24.

21 CLUB
21

West

52nd

Street

When Karen Richards, wife of playwright Lloyd Richards, has a
lunch date with Margo Channing, Broadway’s reigning leading
lady, in All About Eve, the setting is naturally the 21 Club. And
when Karen arrives at 21, whom should she bump into but Addison DeWitt, the all-powerful newspaper columnist, who just
happens to have the up-and-coming Broadway actress Eve Harrington in tow!
In the days of All About Eve (the early 1950s), 21 was one of

the places in New York for the rich and the famous to break bread
together. It still is. Here, on any given day, you're likely to find a


64

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Top table at 21:

Burt Lancaster and
Tony Curtis in

Sweet Smell
a

of Success, 1957

cast of characters that might include Donald Trump, Hugh Jackman, Julianne Moore, Chris O’Donnell, Brooke Shields and Chris
Henchy, and Hillary Swank and Chad Lowe. You may not find
critic Rex Reed at 21, however, since he was once barred from the

dining room for not having a tie. “But this is Bill Blass,” Reed is
reported to have protested, referring to his dapper sports coat.
Still, he flunked the stringent 21 dress test and was refused entry.
In a city that is constantly changing, 21 adheres to its traditions—from dress codes to not tolerating customers who insult
waiters to ejecting patrons who’ve had too much to drink (allowing them to return the next day if they’re sober) to not “selling”
choice tables. Indeed, for many, 21 has served as a club, a place
where they could go anytime and always count on finding a

warm welcome and no surprises. It was no doubt this strong
sense of continuity that attracted Humphrey Bogart to 21, and
today his table—number 30 in the downstairs bar—is still
known as Bogie’s Corner, indicated by a sign hanging nearby.
Upstairs, in the main dining room, Joan Crawford always had
the table just to the left of the entrance.
It may come as a surprise to some that this bastion of Manhattan luxury started out as an expensive speakeasy. Founded in
1930 by Jack Kriendler and Charlie Berns, 21 was then equipped
with an elaborate security/screening system, secret cellars that
concealed some five thousand cases of liquor, and a James
Bond-like bar that could automatically dispose of all the booze


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

65

on the premises in the event of an unexpected visit from the feds.
In those days, the block of 52nd Street between Fifth and Sixth
Avenues was one of the city’s liveliest spots, noted for its
speakeasys, restaurants, and nightclubs. Today, the same block is
wall-to-wall office towers. The sole survivor from the street’s
glory days is the cluster of three brownstone townhouses that
together form 21. With its wrought-iron grill, old-fashioned lanterns, two American flags, and row of cast-iron jockey statues
out front, 21—despite occasional changes in ownership—
remains a monument to a glamorous New York that once was
and that, inside 21 at least, lives on.

The restaurant also lives on in other films besides All About
Eve. In Written on the Wind (1956), directed by “women’s picture” maven Douglas Sirk, 21 was the spot where Rock Hudson
and Robert Stack began their rivalry for Lauren Bacall, and in
Sweet Smell of Success (1957), when press agent Tony Curtis and
jaded newspaper columnist Burt Lancaster exit 21, they see a
drunk being thrown out of a nearby bar—to which Lancaster responds with: “I love this dirty town.” A popular power-lunch
spot in real life and reel life, 21 saw Michael Douglas as that ultimate 1980s corporate animal Gordon Gecko lunching with his
protégé Charlie Sheen in Wall Street (1987), whereas Whoopi
Goldberg does a meeting here with Eli Wallach, Lainie Kazan,
and Timothy Daly in The Associate (1996). The restaurant also
provides festive dining in Metropolitan (1990), Manhattan Mur-

der Mystery (1993), and One Fine Day (1996).
Call 212-582-7200;

25.

visit www.2ZIclub.com.

MUSEUM

OF

MODERN

11 West

53rd

Street

ART

In addition to its trove of van Goghs, Picassos, Monets, and
Mondrians, the Museum of Modern Art—after its recent twoyear, $850-million redo—counts among its treasures important
works by De Mille, Chaplin, Griffith, Porter, Stiller, and Méliés.
In fact, MoMA has some twenty thousand films in its archives
spanning the medium’s history from late-nineteenth-century
silents to twenty-first-century video art.


66

NIEW

YORK:

THE

MOV

TE

HOM ERAS

GUIIDIE

Believing that film was “the only great art peculiar to the
twentieth century,” former MoMA director Alfred H. Barr Jr. established the Department of Film at the Museum of Modern Art
in 1935, and immediately sent curator Iris Barry on a special
mission to Hollywood to drum up support for his innovative undertaking. There, at a party given by Mary Pickford and Douglas
Fairbanks at Pickfair, their lavish Beverly Hills estate, Miss Barry
met industry heavyweights like Samuel Goldwyn, Harold Lloyd,
Harry Warner, Harry Cohn, Ernst Lubitsch, Mervyn LeRoy,
Walt Disney, Jesse Lasky, and Mack Sennett. Returning to New
York with what the Los Angeles Times reported to be “more
than a million feet” of film, Miss Barry had the beginnings of
MoMaA’s collection. But one old-timer who was not as forthcoming as many of his Hollywood colleagues was D. W. Griffith,
who refused to donate his own films to the museum, reportedly
saying that nothing could convince him that films had anything
to do with art. Ultimately MoMA enlisted the aid of Griffith’s
friend and former star actress, Lillian Gish, who eventually persuaded him to hand over to history his collection of films, music,
still photographs, and papers. It seems, however, that it was the
lure of the tax write-off that was really responsible for Griffith’s
change of heart.
For the movie lover, the best thing about MoMA’s film collection is that it is constantly on view. The museum has two theaters—one with 460 seats, the other with 217—which together
are used to present some two dozen screenings a week. The Department of Film and Media-MoMA also cosponsors, with the
Film Society of Lincoln Center, the New Directors/New Films
festival, which is held every year in March/April. In addition to
showing films, the Department of Film and Media-MoMA
maintains a library of film books, screenplays, reviews, publicity
material, and four million stills that is an important research center for students, authors, and historians.
By far the most important activity of the Department of Film
and Media~MoMA is its work in film preservation. A frightening fact is that, of all the feature films made before 1952, half
have disappeared entirely; of those produced before 1930, only
a quarter survive, since the nitrate stock on which they were shot
eventually self-destructs. Newer motion pictures, especially those
shot on color-negative film during from the 1950s to the 1970s,


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

67

are endangered too because the dyes in their negatives are unstable. As a result, many important classics from these decades—
Rebel Without a Cause (1955), Tom Jones (1963)—have faded
or are fading fast. Despite the fact that tremendous amounts of
money are needed to transfer older movies onto newer, more stable film stock, MoMA perseveres in its noble goal of preserving
the modern era’s unique art form.
Screenings by the Department of Film and Media-MoMA
presented free to MoMA

are

members and are open to the general

public for a modest admission charge. For information, call
212-708-9480,

26.

SAMUEL
3 East

or visit www.moma.org.

PALEY
53rd

PLAZA

Street

Built in 1967 by CBS founder William S. Paley in honor of his
father, Samuel Paley Plaza is a pleasant little park with tables,
chairs, trees, and a waterfall. A popular place in warm weather
for Manhattanites and tourists to have light lunches or snacks,

2
Stork Club stars: Henry Fonda, Joan Crawford, Ruth Warrick, Peggy Ann
Garner, Walter Winchell, and Dana Andrews in Daisy Kenyon, 1947
SR

aeT

PE

SS

TS


*

68

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER*S

GUIDE

the park stands on the site of what was once one of New York
City’s most fashionable watering holes: Sherman Billingsley’s famous Stork Club. Always crammed with celebrities, the Stork
Club was the favorite hangout of columnist Walter Winchell,
who kept the rest of the country informed of its glamorous
goings-on.

The most exclusive place to be seated at the Stork Club was
in the small Cub Room, which owner Billingsley reserved for
stars (many of whose portraits graced the walls) and socialites.
The rest of the world had to make do with a table in the main
dining room, which had a large dance floor and nonstop music.
In both rooms, and at the long bar, Billingsley ran a tight ship.
His strictly enforced house rules included refusing admittance to
unescorted women at night, although they could turn up for
lunch or at cocktail hour; also, any customer who started a fight
was permanently barred from the premises.
So great was the fame of the Stork Club that Billingsley was
contracted by the Encyclopaedia Britannica to write its first entry on nightclubs. In addition, the club was immortalized in the
movies, notably in Hitchcock’s made-in-New York The Wrong
Man (1957), with star Henry Fonda in the role of a Stork Club
bass player, and in Otto Preminger’s Daisy Kenyon (1947),
where columnists Walter Winchell and Leonard Lyons play
themselves in a dramatic Stork Club sequence toward the end of
the film. The club closed in 1965, made a brief comeback on
Central Park South in the 1970s, and now lives on on video and
DVD.
27.

SHERATON

ST.

2 East

Street

55th

REGIS

HOTEL

Built by Col. John Jacob Astor, this was the tallest (eighteen stories) and most luxurious hotel New York had ever seen when it
went up in 1904. Public rooms were decorated with the finest
European furnishings; china was by Royal Worcester, Royal
Minton, and Sévres. There was marble everywhere—in stairways, corridors, even in the basement engine and boiler rooms!
Many guest rooms came with their own Steinway pianos, and all
were equipped with such then unheard-of innovations as auto-


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

»

69

The St. Regis, 1987

matic vacuum-cleaning systems and individual thermostats to
control the temperature and humidity of the rooms.
With all its amenities, the St. Regis attracted quite a few glamorous guests over the years—from Humphrey Bogart (it was Bogie’s favorite Manhattan hotel) to Marilyn Monroe, who stayed at
2 East 55th Street when she came to town in 1954 to do location
shooting for The Seven Year Itch. Her marriage to Joe DiMaggio
was in serious trouble at the time, but matters got a lot worse the
evening she shot the infamous scene on Lexington Avenue in which
her skirt gets blown up by the air from a passing subway train. Supposedly, the fight that followed between Monroe and DiMaggio in
their St. Regis suite was so intense that it woke up the whole floor.
Three decades later, the characters played by Michael Caine
and Barbara Hershey in Hannah and Her Sisters get along much
better in their St. Regis room, which they use as.a trysting place
in the 1986 Woody Allen film. Hotel sources point out that only
the hotel’s handsome Beaux Arts facade was used in the film, and
that the interior of the suite shown on screen was decidedly less
grand than a real St. Regis room. Woody made up for the slight
when he returned to the hotel the next year to shoot Radio Days,
which featured the St. Regis’s King Cole dining room as the elegant 1940s nightclub where a blond Mia Farrow works as a cigarette girl. The same bar saw Goldie Hawn, playing an actress in
The First Wives Club (1996), try to drown her sorrows in alcohol after being told she was too old fora role.


70

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

*(hOVIER*®S

GUIDE

More recently, both Woody Allen and Michael Caine returned
to the St. Regis: Allen for his 2003 film Anything Else and Caine for
Miss Congeniality (2000), where he lunched at the hotel’s ultraposh Lespinasse restaurant with detective Sandra Bullock and discussed how she would infiltrate a beauty contest. The only place
movie lovers will find Lespinasse these days is in the film, however,
since it was one of the first big-ticket restaurants to fold after 9/11.
Movie lovers can also spot the St. Regis in Taxi Driver (1976),
where the landmark provides one of the few beautiful images in
Martin Scorsese’s otherwise relentlessly depressing view of Manhattan.
Visit www.starwood.com/Sstregis/index.html.

28.

FRIARS

CLUB

57

55th

East

Street

This English Renaissance townhouse in Midtown Manhattan
has, since 1956, served as headquarters for one of the most famous private clubs in America—the Friars. Among its officers
have been: Frank Sinatra, head abbot; Milton Berle, abbot emeritus; Sammy Davis Jr., bard; Tom Jones, knight; Paul Anka, herald; Alan King, monitor; Howard Cosell, historian; Henny
Youngman, squire. Founded in 1904 by a group of New York
theatrical press agents in order to separate the legitimate members of their profession from the numerous frauds who misrepresented themselves to producers in order to gain free admittance
to the theater, the Friars eventually evolved simply into a club for
members of the theatrical profession. If movie lovers can wangle
an invitation to the Friars’ 55th Street “monastery,” they will
find a dining room and Round the World Bar (named for former
abbot Mike Todd’s 1956 film, Around the World in Eighty
Days) on the first floor, the Milton Berle Room and Joe E. Lewis
Bar on the second, the Ed Sullivan Reading Room and Frank
Sinatra TV-Viewing Room on the third, a billiards room and barber shop on the fourth, a health club on the fifth, and a solarium
and golf practice net on the roof.
World-famous for their celebrity roasts, the Friars over the
years have so honored Jack Benny, Bob Hope, George Jessel,
Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis, Ed Sullivan, Perry Como, Dinah


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

Midtown

al

monastery:

Friars Club

Shore, Garry Moore, Johnny Carson, Burt Reynolds, Barbra
Streisand, Tom Jones, Carol Burnett, Cary Grant, Elizabeth Taylor, George Burns, George Raft, Lucille Ball, Sid Caesar, Whoopi
Goldberg, Billy Crystal, Bruce Willis, Kelsey Grammer, Danny
Aiello, Drew Carey, and Rob Reiner. For many years, these

roasts were stag affairs, and the jokes and language went well
beyond being X-rated. In 1983, comedian Phyllis Diller made
show-business history when, disguised as a man, she crashed a
Friars roast for Sid Caesar. Phyllis, who even used the men’s
room at the Sheraton Centre Hotel on Seventh Avenue, where

the event was held, managed to get through the whole affair
without being discovered. Said Phyllis of the proceedings: “It
was the funniest, dirtiest thing I ever heard in my life. Of course,
I had already heard this language before, because I once ran into
a truck.” In 1988, Liza Minnelli made more history when she
was the first woman invited to becorhe a full-fledged Friar.
Visit www. friarsclub.org.


72

29.

NEW

TRUMP
725

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER'S

GUIIDE

TOWER

Fifth

Avenue

One of big-ego real-estate mogul Donald Trump’s many Manhattan monuments, this mirror-glass tower has offices and a sixstory atrium with waterfall on its lower floors, and ultraposh
apartments higher up. Of all its apartments, none is more lavish
than that of the Donald himself, which takes over the top four
floors of the building. In the movies, the same flat was home
to Trump-like property developer Alexander Cullen, played by
Craig T. Nelson, in The Devil’s Advocate (1997), and both
Trump’s apartment and Trump himself appeared in the 1987
miniseries I’ll Take Manhattan, based on the Judith Krantz pop
novel. The Trump Tower rooftop was also one of Tobey Maguire’s Spider-Man high-rise haunts in the 2002 film. But it and
its owner have really come into their own with the 2003 debut
of the reality TV show The Apprentice, which features lots of the
carrot-haired exec on location at his glitzy Fifth Avenue lair.

Tower of power:
Trump Tower


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

LS

In addition to the Donald, others famous Trump Tower denizens have included Sophia Loren,’Pia Zadora, Johnny Carson, Steven Spielberg, Paul Anka, Martina Navratilova, Andrew
Lloyd Webber, Susan Saint James, and the original King Kong
star, the late Fay Wray.
30.

TIFFANY

& CO.

727

Avenue

Fifth

“Don’t you just love it? Nothing bad can ever happen to you in
a place like this.” Thus spoke Audrey Hepburn as Holly Golightly, the ultimate Manhattan free spirit, in the 1961 Paramount version of Truman Capote’s best-selling novella Breakfast
at Tiffany’s. For the film, which was directed by Blake Edwards,
at the time known mainly as the creator of the Peter Gunn and
Mr. Lucky TV series, a number of New York City locations were
used, including exteriors and interiors of the legendary Tiffany
& Co. jewelers. Tracing its roots back to 1837 (and its current
Fifth Avenue location to 1940), Tiffany’s made certain that the

Sunday shooting of the film went smoothly by stationing forty of
its own security guards and salespeople around the store to keep
an eye on the millions and millions of dollars’ worth of sparkling
merchandise. In the scene that was done inside the store, Audrey
Hepburn and George Peppard shock an uppity Tiffany’s salesman by asking to see something in the $10 range. (Says Audrey/Holly: “I think it’s tacky to wear diamonds before I’m
forty.”) The salesman winds up showing the paira sterling silver
telephone dialer for $6.75—which they decline.
At the end of the 1960s, Tiffany’s appeared briefly in a very
different kind of film, John Schlesinger’s gritty Midnight Cowboy, in a scene where hustler John Voight sees the disparity between the glittering storefront and the homeless man lying in the
gutter in front of it. Cut to 1993, when Tiffany’s is again the
venue for some serious shopping in Sleepless in Seattle, as Meg
Ryan and her ill-starred fiancé Bill Pullman pick out a china pattern, and in Sweet Home Alabama (2002), there’s a memorable
Tiffany’s moment when Reese Witherspoon’s boyfriend Patrick
Dempsey leads her into a dark room, which turns out to be the
diamond department in Tiffany’s. Minutes later he is on his knee
proposing. She says yes.


74

NEW.

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

OVERS

GUIIDIE

Window-shopping:
Audrey Hepburn at
Tiffany in Breakfast at

Tiffany’s, 1961

Meanwhile, across the street at 718 Fifth Avenue, Tiffany’s
chief rival Harry Winston has also made some romantic screen
appearances, notably in Woody Allen’s Everyone Says I Love
You (1999), when Edward Norton goes shopping at the famous
jewelry store for an engagement ring for Drew Barrymore and
the “My Baby Just Cares for Me” musical number ensues. Jennifer Lopez also “borrows” a diamond necklace from Winston’s
to wear to the ball in Maid in Manhattan (2003). And, of course,
both stores have their praises sung by Marilyn Monroe in her
classic “Diamonds Are a Girl’s Best Friend” turn in Gentlemen
Prefer Blondes (1953), a number that Madonna famously ripped
off some forty years later in her Material Girl video.
Visit www.tiffany.com.


MIDTOWN

31.

SONY
550

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

7S

BUILDING
Madison

Avenue

When it debuted in 1984, this hulking Philip Johnson-designed
skycraper was headquarters for AT&T. Drawing mixed reviews
for its retro Chippendale-style cornice and praise for its spacious
enclosed public plaza, the building was taken over by the Japanese electronics giant Sony in 1992 and now bears its name. A
major player in the movie business, Sony bought the historic
MGM lot in Culver City (Los Angeles) to headquarter its Sony
Pictures division, which now also includes Columbia-TriStar. Recently, too, it made a bid for MGM itself. For movie lovers, a
visit to Sony’s New York base of operations offers the chance to

check out the Sony Wonder Technology Lab, an interactive museum, where among many attractions, it offers the chance to
shoot and edit your own video.
Visit www.sonywondertechlab.com.

Sony Pictures Building


76

32.

NEW

BERGDORF
754

Fifth

YORK:

HIE

MOVIE

(EO VEIR@SiG UslDIE

GOODMAN
Avenue

She was queen of the thrift shops, a kooky creature of vintage
feather boas and antique schmatas. It made good copy for a
while, but once twenty-two-year-old Barbra Streisand was well
on the road to superstardom via Funny Girl on Broadway, platinum record albums, and a $5 million TV deal, it was time to
clean up the act. Which is just what La Streisand did in the
spring of 1965 on network TV in an elaborate nine-minute musical production number of “Second Hand Rose” in which she
donned hundreds of thousands of dollars’ worth of glamorous
high-fashion ensembles as part of her My Name Is Barbra
special. The setting for this extraordinary media event was nothing less than New York City’s most exclusive department store,
Bergdorf Goodman, and, besides furnishing the location, Bergdorf’s also supplied the outfits, including fabulous furs by the
store’s famous resident fur designer, Emeric Partos, and hats by
its not-so-well-known (yet!) in-house milliner, a young southern

gent named Halston.
Not to be outdone by all the clothes and designers, Miss
Streisand offered her own fashion tips to readers of the New
York Times in a special on-the-set interview. Proving just how far
she had come in the fashion department, Streisand had this to
say on (1) boas: “A boa can be a great look if it’s kept simple,
like with gray flannel and a hairdo very tight and slim. Curls and
boas don’t go.” (2) Furs: “I used to hate mink but now I appreciate it for its solidity. ... Lynx sheds. . . . I have Russian broadtail—it’s the most beautiful fur—but terribly perishable and I can
hardly wear it because it’s so cold... .I’m mad for fisher.” (3)
Fashion philosophy: “I like simple elegance, neat. I’d rather
change my jewelry and have a few things and wear them all the
time. A person is more important than clothes. A dress should
fade out of sight, but greatly.” One wonders if that’s what she

had in mind when she turned up at the 1969 Academy Awards
in a see-through pants suit.
Besides appearing in the Streisand TV special, Bergdorf’s is
also featured in the forgettable 1979 Ali MacGraw-Alan King
film Just Tell Me What You Want, in a scene where the two stars


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

a7

get into a violent argument that spills out onto the street, and
more memorably in Arthur (1981), where Liza Minnelli goes on
a shoplifting spree. Look for the store, too, in Ridley Scott’s
Someone to Watch Over Me (1987), Married to the Mob (1988),
and Maid in Manhattan (2003).
Visit www.bergdorfgoodman.com.

33.

PLAZA
Fifth

HOTEL
Avenue

at 59th

Street

When it opened in 1907, it billed itself as nothing less than “the
world’s most luxurious hotel.” A mounmental eighteen-story
French chateau, the Plaza was designed by Henry J. Hardenbergh, the architect who had been responsible for New York
City’s fabled Dakota apartment building on Central Park West
some twenty-three years earlier.
Of all Manhattan’s hotels, the Plaza is the city’s undisputed
superstar as far as movies are concerned, and it’s no wonder
since, in addition to being one of New York City’s most historic
and handsome buildings, the Plaza enjoys an eminently photogenic setting. Not only does it have a fabulous fountain in its
front yard, it has Central Park across the street and an everpresent lineup of horse-drawn carriages nearby to complete the
postcard-pretty picture. The list of films, television shows, commercials, and print ads that have used the Plaza as a background
is enormous. Among the more recent features are Hollywood
Ending (2002), Life or Something Like It (2002), It Could
Happen to You (the 1994 Nicolas Cage-Bridget Fonda remake),
Metropolitan (1990), Big Business (1988), Crocodile Dundee
(1986), Brewster’s Millions (1985), The Cotton Club (1984),
Annie (1983), Arthur (1981), Prince of the City (1980), King of
the Gypsies (1978), Love at First Bite (1978), The Rose (1978),
Network (1976), The Front (1976), The Great Gatsby (1974),
The Way We Were (1973), 40 Carats (1973), Puzzle ofa Downfall Child (1970), and Funny Girl (1968).
And then, of course, there’s Plaza Suite, the 1971 film version

of the 1960s Neil Simon play that’s set entirely in Suite 719 of
the hotel. Four years earlier, the Plaza featured in another Neil


78

Northwest,
SS

NEW

YO RK

TPHE

MOVIE

SOVERTS

GiUiiDiE

1959
I ET ET ES

a

TSS

ESSE EE

Simon Broadway success turned Hollywood film, as the hotel
where Jane Fonda honeymooned with Robert Redford in Barefoot in the Park. Further back in time, Hitchcock’s classic North
by Northwest (1959) features a dramatic Plaza sequence in
which Cary Grant is kidnapped from the hotel’s lobby. Before
that, Twentieth Century-Fox booked Plaza rooms for the three
out-of-town star couples vying for a plum New York City job


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

US)

in Women’s World (1954) and, when Ma and Pa Kettle Go to
Town in Universal’s 1950 film, guess where they stay?

Other famous Plaza residents include Christopher Walken,
who operated a drug ring out of his Plaza suite in King of New
York (1990); Macaulay Culkin, who had the good sense to check
* in here when separated (yet again) from his parents in Home
Alone 2: Lost in New York (1992); and Kate Hudson, as the ar-

chetypal rock groupie Penny Lane, who OD’d at the Plaza in the
2000 film Almost Famous.
Returning to the distant past, back in 1930, an early New
York-made talkie called No Limit starred the famous silentscreen actress Clara Bow, and also featured the Plaza. A decade
before that, Norma Talmadge’s By Right of Passage had a major
sequence done on location at an actual charity ball being held at
the Plaza. Playing a small role in this film was an actress friend
of Miss Talmadge’s who later became a major Hollywood
columnist: Hedda Hopper. The script for By Right of Passage
was by Anita Loos, and the Plaza party that the film documented
was hosted by the famed Elsa Maxwell.
Speaking of Plaza parties, one of the most spectacular ever to
be staged at the hotel took place on Monday, November 28,
1966. The event was the gala Black and White Ball hosted by
writer Truman Capote for Washington Post/Newsweek publisher Katharine Graham. The cream of Hollywood, Broadway,
Washington, and New York City society turned up, and among
the movie people on the guest list were Frank Sinatra and his
then wife, Mia Farrow (who twisted the night away with Bennett
Cerf’s son, Christopher), Claudette Colbert (who sat at an “exceedingly popular” table, according to the New York Times),
Candice Bergen, the Sammy Davis Jrs., Marlene Dietrich (a noshow), Greta Garbo (also a no-show), the Henry Fondas, the
Walter Matthaus, the Vincente Minnellis, the Gregory Pecks,

Jennifer Jones, the Billy Wilders, and Darryl Zanuck. Men wore
black dinner jackets and black masks, women turned up in black
or white dresses and white masks. During the evening, Mr.
Capote, whose Breakfast at Tiffany’s and In Cold Blood were
turned into major movies, and who appeared in Neil Simon’s
1979 film, Murder by Death, spent a lot of time alone at the
back of the ballroom just watching and delighting in his cre-


80

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOWERS

GUIDE

ation. At the time, Capote said that the black-and-white theme
for his evening was inspired by Cecil Beaton’s costumes for the
Ascot scenes in My Fair Lady. But movie lovers may wonder if
Mr. Capote wasn’t also influenced by party-guest Vincente Minnelli’s spectacular black-and-white ball sequence in An American
in Paris. Asked why he chose the Plaza for his gala, his answer
was simple: “I think it’s the only really beautiful ballroom left in
the United States.”
Thirty-five years later, the Plaza was the site of another showbiz extravaganza, the 2000 wedding of then fifty-six-year-old
Michael Douglas and thirty-one-year-old Welsh movie actress
Catherine Zeta-Jones. Having sold the exclusive photography
rights to the British celebrity magazine OK! for over $1 million
(with the money supposedly targeted to pay for the education of
the son the couple had already brought into the world), the ZetaJones—Douglases and OK! were somewhat miffed when OK!’s
chief rival Hello! came out with its own unauthorized special

Superstar hotel:
The Plaza


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

81

edition documenting the celebrity nuptials. OK! and the ZetaJones—Douglases sued the offending publication and later were
awarded another couple of million, at which time the Academy
Award-winning actress reportedly quipped that to her and
Michael a million dollars wasn’t all that much money. Later,
courts overturned the initial ruling. Was it something she said?
Besides being in the movies—and the headlines—the hotel is
perhaps best known for a six-year-old resident named Eloise,
who drove her tricycle relentlessly up and down the corridors,
poured water down the mail chutes, and made room service
crazy with orders for peanut butter and jelly sandwiches. Created first as a character for a nightclub act and later massmarketed through a series of charming books, Eloise was the
brainchild of actress/entertainer/MGM musical coach Kay
Thompson. Today, the Plaza remembers Eloise with a portrait
that hangs on a marble wall just beyond the Palm Court.
Visit www.theplazahotel.com.

34.

ZIEGFELD
141

West

THEATER
54th

Street

Opened in 1969, the Ziegfeld is the last major non-multiplex
movie house built in New York. Architecturally uninspired, the
exterior of the theater is a gigantic 1960s white-brick box that
sits on West 54th Street across from the Burlington Industries
Building, which occupies the site of the old Ziegfeld Theater,
built in 1927 to showcase the lavish spectacles of Florenz
Ziegfeld.
Still boasting some of the best projection and multiphonic
sound systems in town, the 1,200-seat house (the city’s secondlargest single-screen movie house after the 1,500-seat Loew’s As-

tor Plaza at 44th Street and Broadway) is frequently used for
studio premieres and screenings—especially for epics like Star
Wars, The Lord of the Rings, Chicago, and HBO’s six-hour Angels in America. The Ziegfeld was also where Woody Allen
staged that star-studded, rain-drenched grand opening of The
Liquidator,

which

movie

lovers

will remember

as the film-

within-a-film starring Melanie Griffith in Celebrity (1998).


82

35.

NEW

WARWICK
65

West

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

HOTEL
54th

Street

The money behind this thirty-three-story hotel, built in 1926,
was that of newspaper heavyweight and sometime film producer
William Randolph Hearst. When Hearst and his Hollywood-star
mistress, Marion Davies, came to Manhattan in the late 1920s,
they often called the Warwick home. In 1927, Marion, who was

known for her unpretentious personality and her lavish Hollywood parties, played havoc with the New York social scene
when Charles Lindbergh—who had just returned from his triumphant solo flight across the Atlantic—chose to attend a bash
at Marion’s Warwick suite over a much more prestigious party
at the Vanderbilt mansion on Fifth Avenue. According to her autobiography. The Times We Had (Bobbs-Merrill, 1975), Mayor
Jimmy Walker sent a special emissary to try to convince Marion
to call off her party. She refused, however, and left the decision
of which party he wanted to attend up to Mr. Lindbergh, who
passed on the Vanderbilt affair and spent most of the evening
sitting on the floor of Marion’s Warwick suite playing the guitar.
Of her social coup, Marion simply said: “It was a nice intimate
little party.”
One of the guests at Marion’s Lindbergh party was Carole
Lombard, who is said to have returned to the Warwick a decade later in the company of Clark Gable. Although they were
not married (to each other) at the time, they soon would be.
In the 1960s, the Warwick’s most famous celebrity guests were
four young men from England called the Beatles who were in
New York to make their live U.S. TV debut on The Ed Sullivan
Show, broadcast from a CBS studio just a few blocks away.
In the 1970s and 1980s, Cary Grant was a frequent guest at
the lavish Warwick suite maintained by the Fabergé cosmetic
empire, which was headquartered across the street at 1345 Avenue of the Americas and for whom Grant was a celebrity
spokesman.
The hotel can be seen on screen in Woody Allen’s 2003 Anything Else and in American Splendor (2003), which documents
the life of comic book author Harvey Pekar, as the place where
he and his wife stay whenever they come to town to be guests


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

83

on The Late Show with David Letterman. Letterman frequently
booked Pekar because he was so “off the wall.”
Visit www.warwickhotelny.com.

36.

MANOLO

BLAHNIK

31

54th

West

Street

With spike-heeled, often backless numbers costing from $300 to
$3,000, this is where those Sex and the City gals—especially
Carrie—found the most important items in their wardrobes:
shoes! Manolo Blahnik, the Spaniard behind the shoes, was born
in the Canary Islands in 1943, where as a young boy he read
his mother’s Vogue magazines. In 1971, after having studied art,
architecture, and literature in Geneva and Paris, Blahnik came
to the United States with his portfolio and was encouraged by
the legendary Vogue editor Diana Vreeland. It was another,
fast-becoming-legendary Vogue editor, Anna Wintour, however,
who really put Blahnik on the map in the late-1980s, when she
featured him almost exclusively on her own size 8%s as well
as in the pages of her magazine. At the same time, Sex and the
City creator Candace Bushnell was a frequent contributor to
the magazine, where supposedly the Big character in Sex and
the City was based on Vogue publisher Ronald Galotti. All in
the family?
37.

MGM

BUILDING

1350

Avenue

SITE

of the

Americas

Currently the Men’s Apparel Building, this glass and whitemarble skyscraper debuted in the late 1960s as the MGM Building and was the New York headquarters of the historic
Hollywood studio Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, responsible for giving the world some of the greatest films of all time. The victim of
corporate takeovers, mismanagement, and time, MGM

is now a

shadow of its former self. Indeed, throughout the 1990s, the
MGM name was more associated with theme parks and hotels,
such as the MGM Grand in Las Vegas, than with moviemaking.
Today, however, MGM is again picking up steam as a producing


84

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER'S

GUIDE

Faye Dunaway triumphant in Network, 1976

organization, and it still has offices in the New York building
that once bore its name—although if a recent takeover bid by
Sony Pictures goes through, that could change. For the moment,
however, movie lovers who visit the building can spot the company’s Leo the Lion logo, which still graces the facade. Movie
lovers can also see the former MGM Building in the 1976
MGM/United Artists film Network, Paddy Chayefsky’s Oscarwinning send-up of the television industry, where it played the
role of the fictional United Broadcasting System.
38.

METROPOLITAN
146

West

57th

TOWER
Street

In Terry Gilliam’s The Fisher King (1991), Jeff Bridges is a troubled former radio host, obsessed with the notion that his advice

may have caused a murder before he finds redemption through
his association with a mysterious street person played by Robin
Williams. In the film Williams lives in the boiler room of a Manhattan office building whereas Bridges calls this striking knifeedged black-glass Midtown high-rise home.


MIDTOWN

39.

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

RUSSIAN

TEA

ROOM

150

57th

Street

West

NYC

85

SITE,

Remember the scene in Tootsie (1980) when Dustin Hoffman

shocks his agent (played by the film’s director, Sydney Pollack) by
turning up for their Russian Tea Room lunch in drag? And remember how, in the same scene, a producer just happens to drop
by the table to say hello? That’s the way it used to be at the Russian Tea Room. Practically next door to Carnegie Hall, this glitzy
Russian restaurant, until it closed in 2002, a casualty of both 9/11
and a wildly expensive redo by celebrity restaurateur Warner
LeRoy, who died in 2001, was one of New York City’s highestvisibility watering holes for show business agents, stars, and studio executives, who did deals while noshing on blinis, blintzes,
and borscht. Besides Tootsie, the Russian Tea Room was featured

in The Turning Point (1977), Unfaithfully Yours (1984), and
Manhattan (1980), in a memorable scene where Woody Allen
takes his son to lunch there, only to have the maitre d’ request that
he put on a house jacket over his T-shirt before he can be seated.
About the same time that Allen was having trouble with his
wardrobe, the Russian Tea Room employed a budding pop
singer in its coat-check room. Back then her name was Madonna
Louise Veronica Ciccone.
40.

CARNEGIE

HALL

57th

and

Street

Seventh

Avenue

Although most people think of it as a cathedral of classical music, for Judy Garland fans Carnegie Hall will always bring to
mind the historic evening of April 23, 1961, when Judy once
again rose from near oblivion and dazzled New Yorkers and the
New York critics with her incredible performing prowess. The
evening turned out to be a milestone in Miss Garland’s recording
and concert careers since the two-record album of the performance, Judy at Carnegie Hall, was the most successful she ever
made.
Judy’s Carnegie Hall triumph came almost seventy years to
the day after the legendary concert hall opened its doors. Built
by industrialist Andrew Carnegie in 1891, this great Victorian


86

NEW

Y0'RIK?

FIRHIE “M'OW LE

SOMERS AG iiTiDIE

structure on West 57th Street has presented practically every major musician of the last 115 years at some time or other. A tough
survivor, Carnegie Hall was slated for demolition in the late
1950s and was to have been replaced by a garish red-porcelainfaced office building. Led by violinist Isaac Stern, New Yorkers
fought hard to save the historic concert hall and ultimately were
triumphant. In 1986, a $50 million renovation of Carnegie Hall
further assured its continued presence on the city’s cultural scene.
Throughout its history, Carnegie Hall has not only provided
a stage for great talents, it has provided homes for some of them
too. Built over and around the concert hall are the Carnegie
Hall Studios, 140 apartments that have housed such names as
Leonard Bernstein, Isadora Duncan, John Barrymore, Paddy
Chayefsky, Bobby Short, and Marlon Brando. Back in the 1920s,
a Spaniard named Angel Cansino gave dance classes at his Carnegie Hall studio. One of his students was his brother’s daughter, Rita, who would become one of Hollywood’s biggest stars
two decades later as Rita Hayworth. Over the years, too, Carnegie Hall has turned up in more than a few films set in New

Carnegie Hall, ca. 1910
a


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

87

York—from both the 1948 and the 1984 versions of Unfaithfully
Yours (the first starring Rex Harrisoh, the second with Dudley
Moore, in the role of a conductor who suspects his wife of cheating on him) to 1964’s The World of Henry Orient (in which a
pretentious concert pianist played by Peter Sellers is the object of
the obsessive adoration of two teenaged girls). In 1999, an especially good year for the hall, Carnegie Hall appeared in three
films: Man on the Moon, with Jim Carrey as Andy Kaufman doing his stand-up act here; Music of the Heart, where Meryl
Streep proves to her East Harlem violin students that practicepractice-practice really can get you to Carnegie Hall; and Wim
Wenders’s documentary Buena Vista Social Club.
Carnegie Hall’s most famous screen appearance, however,
was its title role in the 1947 film Carnegie Hall, which brought
together world-class musicians like Lily Pons, Risé Stevens, Artur Rubinstein, Jan Peerce, Ezio Pinza, Jascha Heifetz, Fritz
Reiner, Leopold Stokowski, the New York Philharmonic Orchestra, and even jazz trumpeter Harry James in a dreadful story

about a cleaning woman who becomes a concert promoter.
Despite the plot, the musical numbers sound great. Recently,
Carnegie Hall was much in the news when it looked as though
one of its famous former tenants, the New York Philharmonic
Orchestra, which spent seventy years there before going to Avery
Fisher Hall in Lincoln Center in 1962, would be returning to

Carnegie. The deal fell through, however.
Visit www.carnegiehall.org.

41.

ANITA
171

LOOS

West

57th

APARTMENT

BUILDING

Street

She got her start in the movies in 1912 when, as a teenager in
San Diego, she sent an unsolicited scenario to D. W. Griffith at
the Biograph Studios in New York. Griffith bought the story
for $25, turned it into a movie called The New York Hat with
Mary Pickford and Lionel Barrymore, and encouraged the young
woman to keep the scenarios coming. The rise of Anita Loos as
one of silent films’ top scenarists and title writers was practically
a story out of one of her own movies. Loos’s greatest success


88

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

came in 1925; it was not through a screenplay, however, but with
her novel Gentlemen Prefer Blondes, which has since been

adapted and readapted for both stage and screen. The most famous screen adaptation was Twentieth Century—Fox’s lavish
1953 musical starring Marilyn Monroe as Loos’s lovable blond
gold digger Lorelei Lee. From the 1940s until her death in 1980
at the age of ninety-three, Anita Loos lived on the corner of Seventh Avenue and 57th Street.
42.

THE

OSBORNE

APARTMENTS

205

West

Street

57th

Completed in 1885, some six years before its neighbor, Carnegie
Hall, went up across the street, the Osborne is one of Manhattan’s oldest apartment buildings. In contrast to its serious brownstone exterior, the eleven-story structure boasts a lobby of
extraordinary fantasy with matched marble floors, sculpted ceilings, gold-accented mosaics, and all sorts of carved columns and
intriguing niches. The apartments at the Osborne are pretty fantastic too, and feature rooms with fifteen-foot ceilings, big bay
windows, and tiny secret staircases that lead up or down to cozy
bedrooms or sitting rooms. Among the many celebrities who
have lived at the Osborne are café-society singer/pianist Bobby
Short (featured in Woody Allen’s Hannah and Her Sisters), fashion designer Fernando Sanchez, humorist Fran Lebowitz, actors
Imogene Coca, Shirley Booth, Lynn Redgrave, Clifton Webb,
and Gig Young.
Mr. Young’s time at the Osborne ended in tragic headlines on
October 19, 1978, when police discovered the bodies of the
Oscar-winning (They Shoot Horses, Don’t They?, 1969) movie
star and his wife of three weeks, German-born Kim Schmidt, inside the couple’s Osborne apartment. According to the police,
the sixty-year-old Young—who had a history of alcoholism and

who had made only five pictures in the ten years since his Oscar
win—had shot his thirty-one-year-old wife and then turned the
gun on himself. Young’s last film, released posthumously, was
titled The Game of Death.


MIDTOWN

43.

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

SUPERMAN

BUILDING

240

Park

Central

NYC

89

South

What did reporter Lois Lane and actress Sylvia Miles have in
common? The same Central Park South address. In the movie
Superman, Ms. Lane somehow manages—on her Daily Planet
salary—to live in an enormous penthouse atop this classy 1941
brick high-rise. In real life, Ms. Miles said that her apartment
was so small that she reduced her whole life to “a wardrobe
trunk with a view.”
The same building was the location for the climax of Elia
Kazan’s A Face in the Crowd (1957), a cautionary tale of celebrity that starred Andy Griffith as a hobo-turned-TV star. At the
end of the film, Griffith, whose flash-in-the-pan success winds up
taking its toll on his psyche, freaks out on (and may well jump
out of) a high floor at 240 Central Park South.
44.

CENTRAL

PARK

The city’s own great outdoors, this 840-acre preserve of hills,
meadows, fields, and lakes was designed in the 1850s by the
noted team of Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux and has
attracted filmmakers from D. W. Griffith to Woody Allen. In the
early days of silent pictures, the park was less often used as a
New York City landmark than simply as a convenient place to
shoot sequences that called for rural settings. In some instances,
too, it was called on to double for an exotic “foreign” location.
D. W. Griffith, for example, cleverly turned the area around Central Park’s ornate Bethesda Fountain into an Italian piazza for a
photoplay that supposedly took place in Florence. As filmmaking became more sophisticated, and as stories set in New York
became a staple of the industry, Central Park—with its unique
vistas of pastoral countryside juxtaposed with a dramatic backdrop of metropolitan high-rises—became a staple of the New
York film.
More than just a pretty background, Central Park is often
used by directors when the plot or mood of the film calls for a
romantic, away-from-the-harsh-world-of-the-city interlude. Consider Jane Fonda and Rod Taylor rowing on Central Park Lake


90

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

in Sunday in New York (1964); Barbra Streisand and Robert
Redford doing likewise a decade later in The Way We Were
(1973); a dying Ali MacGraw watching hubby Ryan O’Neal
skate for the two of them on the Wollman Rink in Love Story
(1970); John Cusack and Kate Beckinsale having eyes only for
each other on the same ice rink in Serendipity (2001); sophisticated newscaster Sigourney Weaver and janitor William Hurt
overlooking their different backgrounds on the bank of Central
Park Lake in Peter Yates’s Eyewitness (1981); Hugh Jackman
proving that chivalry is alive and well when he spirits Meg Ryan
across the park on horseback in pursuit of a purse-snatcher in
Kate and Leopold (2001); and hotel maid Jennifer Lopez and her
young son strolling with Ralph Fiennes in Maid in Manhattan
(2002)—Fiennes, in this modern-day update of the Cinderella
story, doesn’t realize that Lopez, whom he fancies, works at his

hotel.
Of all the park’s romantic possibilities, perhaps none is more
magical than a spin in one of its horse-drawn carriages. Over the
years, these have transported everyone from Will Smith and Eric
Thall in Six Degrees of Separation (1993) to Rock Hudson and
Doris Day in Pillow Talk (1959) to Fred Astaire and Cyd
Charisse in The Band Wagon (1953) for the “Dancing in the
Dark” production number. In this instance, however, it’s Central

Park according to Cedric Gibbons, the famed MGM art director.
Gibbons also re-created the park, specifically the seal tank at its
zoo, for Judy Garland and Robert Walker as the young lovers
in Vincente Minnelli’s The Clock (1945). And while on the sub-

ject of Hollywood studio versions of the park, does anyone remember Universal’s 1948 Up in Central Park, one of Deanna
Durbin’s last films? On the other hand, the real Central Park was

used that same year as the romantic, indeed otherworldly setting
for Joseph Cotten’s encounter with the elusive Jennie (Jennifer
Jones) in David O. Selznick’s classic Portrait of Jennie.
Aside from pure romance, filmmakers often use the park to
express simply the sheer joy and freedom that New York City
can sometimes embody. In the spectacular opening production
number of MGM’s On the Town (1949), for example, Frank
Sinatra, Gene Kelly, and Jules Munshin, as three sailors with just
a day to take in the city, spend part of it cycling in Central Park.


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

91

Close encounter in Central Park: Joseph Cotten and Jennifer Jones in
Portrait of Jennie, 1948
a

aa

ET

SET

There are also wonderful park sequences in The World of Henry
Orient (1964), where its two schoolgirl heroines celebrate their
newfound friendship by romping across rocks and bridges. Other
great romps include the entire cast of Godspell (1973) splishsplashing in the Bethesda Fountain; Michelle Pfeiffer and George
Clooney doing likewise some two decades later in One Fine Day
(1996); Ted Danson, Steve Guttenberg, and Tom Selleck frisbeethrowing (and getting women’s phone numbers) ‘in Three Men
and a Baby (1987); and Edward Norton and Drew Barrymore

singing and dancing in the “Just You, Just Me” production number in Woody Allen’s Everyone Says I Love You (1996).
Of all the New York directors to take advantage of the park’s
scenic possibilities, perhaps none has used it more often than Mr.
Allen. Crimes and Misdemeanors (1989), the “Oedipus Wrecks”
segment of New York Stories (1989), Mighty Aphrodite (1995),
Deconstructing Harry (1997), Hollywood Ending (2002), and
Anything Else (2003) all use the park: Indeed, it’s hard to find a
Woody Allen film that doesn’t have a Central Park interlude.


92

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’*S

GUIDE

Sometimes these are sheer bliss, as in Annie Hall (1977), when

Allen and Diane Keaton share the delights of people-watching at
the Bethesda Fountain. Other times, the park provides a contrapuntal backdrop for more serious stuff—such as Allen contemplating the meaning of life while walking on the jogging path
alongside the park’s Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir in
Hannah and Her Sisters (1986)—or Kenneth Branagh clearing

the air with Judy Davis on the park’s Gapstow Bridge regarding
his wish to divorce her in Celebrity (1998).
Traditionally Central Park has always provided a good neu-

tral place for an important conversation, often a revelation, in
films—whether it’s Tyrone Power as musician Eddy Duchin
telling his son Peter that he is dying, while on the swings of the
Heckscher Playground, in The Eddy Duchin Story (1955), or
Jack Nicholson and Art Garfunkel doing some serious reminiscing by that same ice rink in Carnal Knowledge (1971), or Dustin
Hoffman, on the Central Park Mall, telling his son that he has to
live with his mother in Kramer vs. Kramer (1979), or IRA operative Natascha McElhone, at the Wollman Rink, giving further

instructions to Brad Pitt on his missile-running-mission in The
Devil’s Own (1997), or Jennifer Aniston confiding to her gay
roommate Paul Rudd that she’s expecting a baby, while sitting by
the model sailboat pond, in The Object of My Affection (1998).
And, of course, everyone remembers Zero Mostel and Gene
Wilder discussing their exciting new Broadway show Springtime
for Hitler over lunch by the carousel in The Producers (1968).
Arguably, the film that made the most extensive and creative
use of Central Park as a location was the 1980 movie version of
the famous 1960s Broadway musical Hair. Turning the park into
a fantasy world inhabited by 1960s love children, director Milos
Forman creates an idyllic place, totally devoid of muggers, where
friendly policemen ride dancing horses and where people swim
nude in the lake as casually as they would on a secluded Greek
island. More recently director Mike Nichols also turned the park
into a magical place in his 2003 screen adaptation of playwright
Tony Kushner’s Angels in America. In both the play and the film,
the Bethesda Fountain—with its angel statue—is an especially
important location. In the opening of the film we see the statue

come to life, whereas at the end it provides a symbol of hope for
a confused country and world.


MIDTOWN

MANHATTAN:

ARCHETYPAL

NYC

93

For a documentary look at Central Park and its denizens as
they were in the early 1950s, two Judy Holliday vehicles that
George Cukor shot on location feature long opening Central
Park sequences. In The Marrying Kind (1952), Holliday meets
her husband Aldo Ray near the Fifth Avenue and 59th Street entrance and plays cat and mouse in several locations, whereas in
It Should Happen to You (1954), we find a young Jack Lemmon
(in his film debut) taking pictures around Bethesda Fountain for
a documentary film he is making. In a matter of seconds he meets
Holliday and their paths keep crossing, as we are treated to a
black-and-white tour of the park as the two get acquainted.
Although the majority of Central Park’s screen appearances
show it off as one of New York’s loveliest locations, sometimes
it can be a dangerous place. George Peppard is stalked here in
Breakfast at Tiffany’s (1961); hotel-less Jack Lemmon and Sandy
Dennis spend ascary night in the Rambles in The Out-of-Towners (1970); and the park’s northern reaches embody a no-man’sland of crime and fear in Across 110th Street (1972). It’s also in
Central Park where Dustin Hoffman meets his nemesis, a sadistic Nazi played by Sir Laurence Olivier, on a catwalk above the
reservoir in Marathon Man (1976) and where Meryl Streep has
to contend with a kinky killer out to trap her amid the Rambles

in Still of the Night (1979). Movie lovers will remember, too,
that Mel Gibson’s son is kidnapped at the Bethesda Fountain in
Ransom (1996) and Jeffrey Jones meets a grisly end while jogging along the reservoir in The Devil’s Advocate (1997).
The park’s connections with show business go beyond its importance as a film location. With its Delacorte outdoor theater
under the direction of the New York Shakespeare Festival, the
park is the site of live theatrical productions each summer, which
feature big stars. Arguably the most stellar ensemble to perform
at the Delacorte was made up of Meryl Streep, Kevin Kline,
Philip Seymour Hoffman, Christopher Walken, Natalie Portman,
John Goodman, and Marcia Gay Harden—who did Chekhov’s
The Seagull in the park in the summer of 2002, directed by Mike
Nichols no less. It was at the Delacorte, too, where Michelle
Pfeiffer tried her hand at Shakespeare, with decidedly uneven results, as Olivia in Twelfth Night in 1989. She would have better
luck—and reviews—when she did Titania in Michael Hoffman’s
1999 film of A Midsummer Night’s Dream.


94

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Meanwhile, Central Park’s ninety-acre Great Lawn is often
used for free outdoor concerts that often feature big stars and attract huge audiences. Legendary concert appearances include
Barbra Streisand, who famously lit up a joint in 1967, and Diana Ross, who valiantly persevered one rainy evening in 1983,
until lightning, gale-force winds, and wayward hair extensions
forced her to call the whole thing off. Music lovers will also want
to check out Strawberry Fields, the teardrop-shaped grove that’s
a memorial to the late John Lennon, who was murdered on December 8, 1980, in front of his nearby apartment building, the
Dakota, on West 72nd Street and Central Park West. The memorial was donated by the late Beatle’s wife Yoko Ono.
Visit www.centraloark.org.
