
Union Square/Gramercy Park/
Chelsea: From Biograph to
Law & Order

In 1909, when a teenaged Broadway actress named Mary Pickford decided it was time to think seriously about getting into
the movie business, she hopped a Fifth Avenue bus and headed
downtown toward Union Square. Her destination was the Biograph Studios, at 11 East 14th Street, where she was instantly
cast in a D. W. Griffith potboiler that marked the beginning of
one of the most spectacular careers in film history. If Mary
hadn’t been so lucky at Biograph, however, she could have continued her job search at any number of other studios—Kalem,
Craftsmen, Edison, Reliance-Majestic, American Kinograph—
that were headquartered in the lofts and office buildings of
nearby Gramercy Park and Chelsea.
Today, these same neighborhoods provide a mixed bag of delights for the movie lover who ventures here. These include the
old studio buildings of Chelsea (one of which is still used for producing TV shows), the vital new studio facility that’s home to the
Law & Order series, the 1902 high-rise on whose rooftop James
Stewart and Kim Novak once spent a romantic evening (on film),
two of the “factories” where the late Andy Warhol turned out


210

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVERS

GUIDE

underground films in the 1960s, and one of Manhattan’s most
exclusive—and star-studded—residential enclaves. Today’s Chelsea is also the capital of gay New York—with numerous gay and
lesbian bars, cafés, and shops. These days, too, the neighborhood
boasts the greatest concentration of art—some two hundred
galleries—in the city.
1. BlOGRAPH
841

STUDIOS

SITE

Broadway

The American Mutoscope and Biograph Company was the
rather exotic name of one of the first motion-picture companies
to mount a serious challenge to Thomas Edison’s monopolistic
hold on the early film industry. Biograph produced initially a
better-quality image (by using larger-sized film) and enjoyed the
participation of W. K. L. Dickson, a former—and the most
influential—player on the team that developed motion pictures
at Edison. Biograph’s first studio was on the roof of the Hackett

12s

Biograph’s revolving rooftop stage atop the Hackett Carhart Building,

1896


UNION

SQUARE/GRAMERCY

PARK/CHELSEA

211

Belle of 14th Street:
Biograph starlet

Mary Pickford

Carhart Building, a great Victorian fortress with ornate columns,

pediments, and turrets that still stands on the northwest corner
of Broadway and East 13th Street. Similar to the Black Maria
studio that Dickson had built for Edison in West Orange, Biograph’s rooftop facility was mounted on tracks and revolved
with the sun. The foundations of this primitive studio are still in
place atop the restored Hackett Carhart Building.
Unfortunately, the site of some of Biograph’s greatest cinematic triumphs—a brownstone studio at 11 East 14th Street to
which it moved in 1906—was razed in the 1960s to make way
for a big boring brick apartment building. It was at the Union
Square studio that D. W. Griffith directed his first film, The Adventures of Dollie, in 1908. Griffith went on to become the studio’s top director and brought such talents as Mary Pickford,
Lillian and Dorothy Gish, Blanche Sweet, Lionel Barrymore,
Wallace Reid, Mabel Normand, Mae Marsh, Harry Carey, and

Mack Sennett into the Biograph fold. When Griffith left the stu-


Zhe

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

EON ER=S

1GIU'IDIE

dio in 1913 for the Mutual Film Corporation, Biograph’s status
fell quickly, and in 1915 the company was dissolved. Many of its
films survive, however, thanks both to Griffith, who saved copies
of all his productions, and to the Museum of Modern Art, which
acquired Griffith’s collection in the mid-1930s for its then new
film department.
In 1975, a plaque was dedicated by former Biograph beauties
Lillian Gish and Blanche Sweet at the site of the historic townhouse studio at 11 East 14th Street. The day after the ceremony,
however, the plaque mysteriously disappeared, and there have
been no further efforts to put up a new one. There should be.
And while we’re talking about plaques, there also ought to be
one at Biograph’s original studio site at 841 Broadway.
2. THE
33

FACTORY
Union

SITE

Square

West

It was the best of times, it was the worst of times... it was the

1960s. Underground avant-garde films were the rage—especially
those created by a platinum-blond NYC artist named Andy
Warhol. Andy made his films—which often used stationary cameras and ranged from quickies like Blow Job to six-hour epics like
Sleep—at a series of New York City studios he called “factories.”
Andy’s first factory, which he occupied between 1963 and 1967,
was at 231 East 47th Street. With its walls covered in silver Mylar,
the place hosted a constant stream of drop-ins from the street,
many of whom wandered in and out of whatever film Warhol and
his associates happened to be shooting at the time. Just like in the
old days of Hollywood, this wacky, carefree moviemaking organization also boasted its own superstars. Among them were Viva,
Ultra Violet, Baby Jane Holzer, Paul America, Joe Dallesandro,
and Edie Sedgwick, whose tragic, brief, fast-lane life and subsequent death of a drug overdose were documented in both the 1982
best-selling book Edie and in the 1983 film Ciao! Manhattan.
In early 1968, Warhol and company moved from their 47th
Street base (which was about to be demolished for an apartment
building) to the sixth floor of a ca. 1900 loft building at 33
Union Square West. Although now the walls were painted white
and everything was very crisp and minimal, the moviemaking at


UNION

SQUARE/GRAMERCY

PARK/CHELSEA

Factory worker: Andy Warhol with underground

US:

movie star Gerald

Malanga
Fe

SS

the new Factory was just as freewheeling as it had been uptown.
Things changed radically, however, in June 1968, when a young
woman named Valerie Solanis wandered into the Factory, pulled
a gun, and fired it at Warhol, supposedly because he had refused
to produce a screenplay she had written. The episode was the inspiration for the 1996 film I Shot Andy Warhol, which starred
Lili Taylor—once labeled Queen of the Independent Cinema—as
the crazed Solanis and Richard Harris’s actor son Jared as
Warhol. The film did not use the Union Square site for its Factory sequences; instead it used a loft building at 535 West 22nd
Street, between Tenth and Eleventh Avenues.
In real life, Warhol survived his wounds, but from then on security at the Factory became much tighter, and the mood became
more tense. Another change that took place after the shooting


214

NIEWO

20 1RIKe,

THHIE SM OVAIE

TE OMtEIRIZS

SGMDiE

Andy Warhol’s 1968-1973
Factory (on right)

was that Warhol turned over most of the directorial duties to his
associate, Paul Morrissey, who went on to do more commercial
features such as Flesh (1968), Trash (1970), and Heat (1972) at

the Union Square studio.
In 1973, the Factory moved again, to a building a few hundred feet across Union Square at 860 Broadway. The space was
enormous, but ultimately not much filmmaking took place here,
and by 1984 Warhol’s enterprises, which now included the very
successful Interview magazine, had moved into conventional
offices at 22 East 33rd Street. With this move and then with
Warhol’s untimely death owing to complications (and possible
negligence) following gall bladder surgery in 1987, the grand
days of Andy Warhol movies and of the 1960s were definitely

over.


UNION

SQUARE/GRAMERCY

3. WASHINGTON
40

Irving

IRVING

PARK/CHELSEA

HIGH

215

SCHOOL

Place

A huge bust of the great American writer Washington Irving
stands at the northwest corner of this big old Gramercy Park
school building that bears his name. But movie lovers will be
more interested in the autographed portrait of another American
legend that hangs in the high school’s library. Presented to her
alma mater in 1986 by a small contingent of loyal fans, the portrait commemorates the most famous member of Washington
Irving’s Class of 1921: Lily Chauchoin. More interested in art
and fashion design than in the theater during her Washington Irving days, little Miss Chauchoin nonetheless appeared in several
school plays. The experience must have served her well, because
two years after leaving Washington Irving she changed her name
to Claudette Colbert, made her debut on the stage of the Provincetown Playhouse in Greenwich Village, and soon was acting
on Broadway as well as at Paramount’s Astoria film studios
in Queens. Next came Hollywood, where she not only won an
Academy Award in 1935 for It Happened One Night, opposite
Clark Gable, but was one of the highest-paid people in the United
States, earning $426,944 in 1938, which was the fourth highest
salary in the country that year. Her age-defying beauty kept her
working, mainly in the theater, well into her eighties. Her last film
appearance was as Troy Donahue’s mother in Parrish (1961); but

in 1986, at the age of eighty-one, she starred with Ann-Margret
in the TV miniseries The Two Mrs. Grenvilles, based on a novel

about a high-society murder by Dominick Dunne. A longtime resident of the Caribbean island of Barbados, where she had a lavish
plantation house, Colbert died on the island in 1996.
In addition to Claudette Colbert, Washington Irving High
also boasts two other movie stars as former students: Sylvia
Miles (Academy Award-nominated for Best Supporting Actress,
both in 1969 for Midnight Cowboy and in 1975 for Farewell,
My Lovely); and Whoopi Goldberg, who garnered an Academy
Award nomination (for Best Actress) for her 1985 film debut in
The Color Purple and won an Oscar as Best Supporting Actress
for Ghost (1990). Miss Miles, who attended Washington Irving
sometime in the 1940s, was Sylvia Lee at the time; Miss Goldberg, who dropped out of Washington Irving sometime in the


216

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

1960s, did so as plain-old Caryn Johnson (she had yet to encounter that burning bush in California that she says came up
with her current name).

For anyone who wonders why Washington Irving produced
only actresses, the answer is that the school had been an all-girls
institution for most of its life. In fact, Washington Irving was the
only remaining all-girls public high school in New York City up
until the fall of 1986, when the board of education ruled that it
had to admit boys.
4. GRAMERCY

PARK

East

20th

Third

Avenues

and

21st

Streets

between

Park

and

One of New York City’s most attractive residential enclaves,
Gramercy Park dates back to 1831 and, as its main attraction,
boasts a locked, fenced-off private park that can be entered only
by owners and tenants of the townhouses and apartments that
surround it on four sides. In the last century, the legendary Amer-

John Barrymore building:
36 Gramercy Park East


UNION

SQUARE/GRAMERCY

PARK/CHELSEA

217

Number 3 Gramercy

Park West—where
John Garfield died

ican actor Edwin Booth spent the final years of his life in the
handsome Stanford White-designed townhouse at number 16
Gramercy Park South, which was also the headquarters for the
Players, the famous theatrical club that Booth helped found in
1886. Today the Players—which counts among its current and
former members John and Lionel Barrymore, Irving Berlin, John
and Keith Carradine, Dick Cavett, Alistair Cooke, Joseph Cotten, Walter Cronkite, Hume Cronyn, Alfred Drake, Maurice
Evans, José Ferrer, Richard Gere, George Grizzard, Rex Harrison, Hal Holbrook, Raul Julia, Jack Lemmon, Garson Kanin,
Charles Kuralt, Burgess Meredith, Carroll O’Connor, Sir Laurence Olivier, and Frank Sinatra—is still housed at the same
landmark Gramercy Park location. Booth’s former bedroom,
where he died on June 7, 1893, has been kept just as it was back

then, and outside in the park he is remembered with a bronze
statue of him in the role of Hamlet.
No statue commemorates another show-business personality
who also died here, although newspapers made quite a story of
actor John Garfield’s fatal heart attack, which he suffered in
1952 during a late-night visit to 3 Gramercy Park West, the
townhouse of actress-turned-interior decorator Iris Whitney. Although rumor had it that Mr. Garfield died in Miss Whitney’s
bedroom, Garfield’s biographer, Larry Swindell, in Body and
- Soul: The Story of John Garfield (Morrow, 1975), writes that the
forty-year-old star expired in the guest bedroom with nothing
more sensational by his side than an unfinished glass of orange


218

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER'S

GUIDE

juice on the night table. A few doors down, still on the west side
of the park, the gray brick apartment building at 7 (with the entrance on East 20th Street) was a former Manhattan address of
Julia Roberts.
Over on the east side of the park, two bizarre apartment
buildings at numbers 34 and 36 stand out and are of special interest to movie lovers. Number 34 is a mysterious turreted urban
castle—with a marble-columned entrance that leads to a distinctive foyer sporting a stained-glass skylight and mosaic-tiled floor
and walls. The building was the longtime home of The Wizard
of Oz’s Wicked Witch of the West, Margaret Hamilton. Character actress Mildred Dunnock, actor John Carradine, and legendary Warner Bros. tough guy James Cagney are three other
former star residents. Next door, number 36 is a Gothic whitemarble affair of twelve stories guarded by statues of knights in
armor. Between 1910 and 1916, John Barrymore kept an apart-

ment in this building during the period that he appeared in his
first films for the Famous Players Film Company, which conveniently had its main studio on nearby West 26th Street. Movie
lovers with eagle eyes may also recognize 36 Gramercy Park East
from the 1949 MGM

film East Side, West Side, in which its ex-

terior was used as the apartment house where Barbara Stanwyck’s parents supposedly lived. (Featured in the same film was
a starlet named Nancy Davis, who would become much more famous under her married name: Reagan.)
The Gramercy Park Hotel, at 52 Gramercy Park North, is easier to recognize in the 2000 film Almost Famous as the hotel that
furnished digs for the 1970s rock group Stillwater. The hotel was
also used in The Devil’s Own (1997) and Addicted to Love
(1997). Gramercy Park’s most popular film location, however, is
the National Arts Club, next door to the Player’s Club at 15
Gramercy Park South. A landmark 1845 mansion, which was
extensively redone in the mid-1880s by Calvert Vaux (half of the
team of Olmsted and Vaux, who designed Central Park), this delightful bit of Old New York—complete with a magnificent
stained-glass ceiling—was the perfect location for the glittering
post-opera ball in Martin Scorsese’s 1993 take on Edith Wharton’s novel of upper-class life in 1870s Manhattan, The Age of
Innocence. That same year, Woody Allen used the National Arts
Club—which in real life counts not only artists and architects as


UNION

SQUARE/GRAMERCY

PARK/CHELSEA

Winona

219

Ryder and

Daniel Day-Lewis at

the National Arts
Club on Gramercy

Park South in The
Age of Innocence

members but also a number of movie people such as Martin
Scorsese, Dennis Hopper, Robert Redford, Ethan Hawke, and

Uma Thurman—in Manhattan Murder Mystery, for a scene
where Diane Keaton, while at a tony Arts Club wine tasting, sees
her supposedly murdered neighbor outside in the street. For The
Thomas Crown Affair (1999), the club was again the site of an
A-list New York City event, this time a fund-raiser, at which
glamorous insurance investigator René Russo confronts businessman Thomas Crown (Pierce Brosnan) about his possible involvement ina recent theft at the Metropolitan Museum. Despite
conflicts of interest, the meeting turns out to be the beginning of
a very beautiful friendship.
5.

PETER

East

COOPER

20th

VILLAGE

to 23rd

Streets/First

Avenue

to

FDR

Drive

To accommodate the huge demand for affordable housing for
servicemen returning from World War II and their soon-to-bebooming families, the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company—


220

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

with some serious tax breaks from the government—built two
massive apartment complexes on the middle East Side of Manhattan. The less grand of the two—Stuyvesant Town—stands
from 14th to 20th Streets between First Avenue and the FDR
Drive. Movie lovers will be more interested in the somewhat
posher project—Peter Cooper Village—which runs from 20th to
23rd Streets. It was here that Judy Holliday and her screen husband Aldo Ray moved (9 Peter Cooper Road) as newlyweds in
George Cukor’s The Marrying Kind (1952). Obsessed with improving their lot in life, Ray is convinced that he can make a fortune with his invention, ball-bearing sliders—which eerily turn
out to be a forerunner to the Rollerblades that conquered the
world some four decades later!
The 1956 boxing epic The Harder They Fall brought
Humphrey Bogart to Peter Cooper Village, where his down-andout sportswriter character lived at 8 Peter Cooper Road. Supposedly Bogie played with the local kids between takes. When
Robert Redford dropped by the same neighborhood in 1974 to
shoot Three Days of the Condor, he had to contend with screeching teenage female fans. Other films and TV shows that have
shot at Peter Cooper and Stuyvesant Town have been Naked
City, Decoy, Kojak, and Mike Hammer.
A former longtime Peter Cooper/Stuyvesant Town resident
was Karl Malden, who was featured in both the stage (1947) and
screen

(1951)

versions

of Tennessee

Williams’s

A Streetcar

Named Desire, but who is perhaps best known as Michael Douglas’s boss on the TV series The Streets of San Francisco and as the
man who told America not to leave home without their American
Express card. Playwright Arthur Miller’s actress sister Joan
Copeland also once resided at Peter Cooper, where she frequently
entertained Miller and her then sister-in-law Marilyn Monroe.
Peter Cooper, by the way, was a nineteenth-century millionaire philanthropist who made his fortune as a glue manufacturer.
6. FLATIRON
175

When

Fifth

BUILDING
Avenue

it went up in 1902, the three-sided, twenty-two-story

Fuller Building was one of New York’s most unusual-looking
structures, as well as its first full-fledged skyscraper. Instantly


UNION

SQUARE/GRAMERCY

PARK/CHELSEA

221

nicknamed the Flatiron Building on account of its shape, the new
architectural wonder became one of Manhattan’s best-known
landmarks in the early part of the twentieth century. In addition
to its height and shape, the Flatiron Building was also believed
to occupy one of the windiest corners in Manhattan and was
thus popularly considered a prime place to catch a glimpse of a
lady’s ankle—or, better yet, her knee—should the wind catch her
skirt at the right moment. Interestingly enough, it was this aspect
of the new building and not its architecture that caught Crescent
Films’ camera in early 1905 when it made a risqué little docudrama entitled The Flatiron Building on a Windy Day. This enthusiastic description of the film from a catalogue of the time
gives an idea of what turned early movie audiences on:
This sidesplitting scene was taken January 25, 1905, when the
wind was blowing a gale, and gives one a general idea of what
women experience on a windy day around this noted corner.
The great velocity of the wind can be plainly seen by the man-

Flatiron Building


222

NEW

MOIRIK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVERS

“GUNiDIE

ner in which the pedestrians are clutching at their hats and
skirts and grasping at anything for support. It is at this corner
where one can get a good idea of the prevailing types in
hosiery and lingerie. This is the finest picture that has ever
been taken at this corner, and we can safely recommend it as
something exceptionally fine.

Some fifty years later, the Flatiron Building again furnished the
setting for an erotic, although far more sophisticated, cinematic
interlude, when James Stewart and Kim Novak find themselves
in a passionate clinch atop its roof in Bell, Book, and Candle.

“Where are we?” asks a love-dazed Stewart of the beautiful
witch played by Miss Novak, who has transported them to this
ultraromantic spot in the 1958 comedy about magic in modern
Manhattan. “On top of the Flatiron Building,” she replies. “You
liked its shape, and you wanted to be on top ofa tall building.
We had no luck at the Empire State Building.”
When star actor/director Warren Beatty came to New York to
do location shooting for Reds in 1980, he wound up at the bottom of the Flatiron Building. Needing an early-twentieth-century
backdrop for the sequence where Louise Bryant (Diane Keaton)
arrives in Manhattan, Beatty found that the venerable 1902
landmark served his purposes perfectly. To shoot the scene, street
and traffic lights around the building were removed, but little
else had to be altered. The snow in the scene was not artificial,
by the way; it was a lucky happenstance that added to the beauty
of the shot. More recently, the distinctive landmark building
turned up in As Good as It Gets (1997), as the offices of Melvin
Udall’s (Jack Nicholson’s) publisher, and in Spider-Man (2002),
as the Daily Bugle newspaper offices, where young Tobey
Maguire (Spider-Man) makes a splash as the only photographer
in New York able to snap pictures of the elusive superhero.
7. HASBRO
32

West

TOY

BUILDING

23rd

Street

It was in this imposing 1892 cast-iron building—originally
Stern’s Dry Goods Store—that thirteen-year-old Josh Baskin had
a stellar career as a creative director of the ailing MacMillan Toy


UNION

SQUARE/GRAMERCY

PARK/CHELSEA

223

Big location: former
Stern’s Dry Goods

building on West

23rd Street

Company. At first, since Josh looked like a thirty-something Tom
Hanks, no one suspected his real age in Penny Marshall’s 1988
Big. The building—now known as the Hasbro Toy Building—
used for MacMillan Toys is in the center of Manhattan’s wholesale toy district. Around the corner at 200 Fifth Avenue, the
Italian Renaissance-style International Toy Center building will
also be of interest to movie lovers, since it served as the offices of
the New York Globe, which employed columnist J. J. Hunsecker
(Burt Lancaster) in Sweet Smell of Success (1957). In the 1980s,
cofounding editor of Spy magazine Graydon Carter is believed to
have been the pen behind the rag’s take-no-prisoners gossip column, which ran under the byline of J. J. Hunsecker. Today,

Carter uses his own name as the editor in chief of Vanity Fair

magazine.
8. SCHOOL
COMPANY
131

West

OF

VISUAL

ARTS/KALEM

FILM

SITE
21st

Street

Currently home to one of the city’s premier art (and film)
schools, this Chelsea loft building saw a group of film pioneers

set up operations here in 1907. With a director named Sidney
Olcott in charge of production, the Kalem Film Company specialized in Westerns, which it shot on location across the Hudson
River in the badlands of New Jersey near Fort Lee. In its heyday,


224

NEW

YO'IR‘K:: TAI

“MON VE

LOWERS 1G: UNIDIE

Kalem came out with over two hundred short films a year and
was also noted for productions done in more exotic locations
such as Florida, California, Ireland, and the Middle East. In fact,

one of its greatest successes was a feature based on the life of
Christ, From the Manger to the Cross, which was lensed in Pales-

tine in 1911, and which featured Robert Vignola (who later became a top Hollywood director) as Judas. An even earlier Kalem
success also had a biblical theme—a one-reel version of the novel
Ben Hur in which Manhattan Beach in Brooklyn doubled as the
Holy Land. Since Kalem had not acquired the motion-picture
rights to Gen. Lew Wallace’s book (motion-picture rights didn’t
even exist at the time), Kalem was sued and eventually paid the
Wallace estate $25,000 in a landmark 1911 out-of-court settlement. In 1916, a financially troubled Kalem, which had continued to concentrate on short films at a time when most of the
industry had switched over to features, was bought by Vitagraph
and never heard from again.
9. TENTH

PRECINCT

230

20th

West

Street

Cinematographer William Daniels won an Academy Award for
his brilliant camerawork in the 1948 film The Naked City. Directed by Jules Dassin, the picture was shot entirely in NYC and
is considered, along with Louis de Rochemont’s The House on
92nd Street, to be a landmark in 1940s on-location filmmaking.

Among the many spots used in The Naked City—from Wall
Street to the old Roxy Theater on Seventh Avenue at 50th
Street—none was more important than the Tenth Precinct, described by the film’s narrator, Mark Hellinger, as “a rather
shabby building on a rather shabby street.” Used both for exteriors and interiors, the Tenth Precinct was supposedly the base
from which the team of detectives and cops headed by Barry
Fitzgerald as Inspector Muldoon worked on solving the murder
of Howard Duff’s girlfriend. The murder, by the way, took place
at an apartment building at 52 West 83rd Street. Why Chelsea’s
Tenth Precinct, some sixty blocks away from the scene of the
crime, was in charge of the investigation, we are never told. But
then, as we all know, “there are eight million stories in the


UNION

SQUARE/GRAMERCY

PARK/CHELSEA

225

Inside the Tenth Precinct: Tom Pedi, Barry Fitzgerald, Don Taylor, and
Howard

Duff in The Naked City, 1948

Naked City,” so nothing should surprise us. Today, the Tenth
Precinct and the block it occupies—wedged between the booming restaurants and galleries of Chelsea—are anything but
“shabby.”
10.

GENERAL

THEOLOGICAL

175

Avenue

Ninth

SEMINARY

An oasis of nineteenth-century architecture in the middle of
Chelsea, this quadrangle of handsome buildings has been home
to an Episcopal seminary since 1835. Today, it is a popular location for films and TV shows that want an instant academic
setting. In Gus Van Sant’s 2001 feature Finding Forrester, the
seminary’s stunning refectory doubled as a college lecture hall
and in House of D (2004), starring Robin Williams, the property’s beautiful grounds and gym were used. The series Law co
Order, based just a few blocks away at the Chelsea Piers studios,
virtually treats the seminary as its back lot. Besides providing
college and prep school campus locations for L@O, the semi-


226

NEW.

YORK:

THE IMiOV KES BOWE

RS SGU

DiE

Chelsea’s secret garden:

General Theological
Seminary

nary buildings and interiors are often dressed to double as police
stations, hospitals, offices, and apartments. The Law c& Order
spinoffs Special Victims Unit and Criminal Intent also shoot here
on a regular basis, as does Third Watch. In addition, the seminary and its beautifully landscaped grounds and gardens are often booked for commercials and fashion shoots.
The gardens of the General Theological Seminary are open to the
public from Monday to Friday from 12 noon to 3 p.m., and on
Saturday from Il a.m. to 3 p.m. Tours are offered in summer. Call
212-243-5150 or visit www.gts.edu.

11. ANTHONY
467

West

PERKINS
21st

TOWNHOUSE

Street

In the 1960s and 1970s, Mr. Perkins was the live-in landlord of
this Chelsea brownstone. Movie lovers will remember that the
actor had his greatest success on-screen as manager of the Bates


UNION

SQUARE/GRAMERCY

PARK/CHELSEA

227

Motel in Psycho (1960). In 1973, at the age of forty-one, Perkins
married photographer Berinthia (Berry) Berenson, sister of actress Marisa Berenson. The two lived mainly in Los Angeles,
where they had two children, Osgood (named for Perkins’s famous actor father) and Elvis. In 1992, Perkins died of AIDS. On
September 11, 2001, his wife perished on a flight from Boston to
Los Angeles, which crashed in western Pennsylvania after being
taken over by terrorists.
12.

EMPIRE
210

DINER

Tenth

Avenue

A bit of Americana at 22nd Street and Tenth Avenue, this vintage
Art Deco diner was restored in the mid-1970s and turned into a
trendy watering hole long before Chelsea became the hot neighborhood it is today. A natural for photography, the Empire’s
shiny stainless-steel fagade has been used often for commercials
and print ads and stands out among various NYC landmarks in
the opening of Woody Allen’s Manhattan (1979). Recent films

Empire Diner


228

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

that have used the location have been Igby Goes Down (2001),
where it serves as a rendezvous for Sookie (Claire Danes) and her
troubled boyfriend Igby (Kieran Culkin), and Men in Black II

(2002), where Will Smith has dinner with the young woman
(Rosario Dawson) whose life he has just saved from the usual
aliens. Law @& Order has also shot here.
13.

CHELSEA

PIERS

SPORTS

AND

ENTERTAINMENT

Avenue

between

17th

and

COMPLEX

Eleventh

23rd

Streets

For Manhattan sports fans who would rather play than just sit
and watch, this dynamic complex, which was built in a cluster of
extensively refurbished piers on the Hudson River in the mid1990s, is the answer to their prayers. Here they will find a fortylane bowling alley, a roller rink, two ice rinks, indoor running
track, rock-climbing wall, Olympic swimming pool, gymnasium,
sports medicine center, and—the first of its kind in Manhattan—
a massive, net-covered golf driving range with fifty-two tee-off
points on four levels. Movie fans will no doubt remember the

Inside Law & Order: Sam Waterston and Angie Harmon

on the set at

Chelsea Piers
a

a

a

a

eT


UNION

SQUARE/GRAMERCY

PARK/CHELSEA

229

scenes in Serendipity (2002), where John Cusack tries to relieve
the stress of his unsuccessful quest for Kate Beckinsale by slamming golf balls out toward the Hudson River.
The Chelsea Piers are also home to one of the greatest success
stories in New York television history. Known as Pier 62 and
taking up most of the northernmost end of the building are the
production offices and soundstages—including the courtroom
set and the D.A. and detectives’ offices—of Law & Order, currently the longest-running police series in the history of television
and the second longest-running drama series after Gunsmoke.
In addition to the original Law ce Order series, Pier 62 also is
the headquarters for its spinoffs—Law c& Order: Criminal Intent, which shoots here, and Law ¢& Order: Special Victims Unit,
which films in North Bergen, New Jersey.

Movie lovers who visit Chelsea Piers should make a point of
checking out the third-floor gallery, which displays photos and
posters of the many productions that have been done here.
Visit www.chelseapiers.com.

14.

CHELSEA

HOTEL

222

23rd

West

Street

A 23rd Street landmark, the red-brick, iron-balconied, mansardroofed Chelsea Hotel opened in 1884 as one of the city’s first
cooperative apartment houses. In 1905 it became a hotel, but
throughout its history the Chelsea has catered to long-term tenants. Over the years it has been especially popular with the
literati: Mark Twain, Eugene O’Neill, O. Henry, Thomas Wolfe,
Tennessee Williams, Vladimir Nabokov, Brendan Behan, Arthur

Miller, Dylan Thomas, and William Burroughs have all called the
Chelsea home from time to time. Plaques in the lobby commemorate many of these famous former residents. Sci-fi-movie lovers
will be intrigued to learn that novelist Arthur C. Clarke penned
the script for 2001: A Space Odyssey while living at the Chelsea.
It was Andy Warhol, however, who put the Chelsea on movie
lovers’ maps back in 1966 when he started shooting artist Brigid
Berlin in her Chelsea hotel room. This footage formed the basis

for The Chelsea Girls, the film considered by many critics to be


230

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER®™S

“GUIDE

Chelsea Hotel

Warhol’s best, and also the first of Andy’s flicks to score a solid
commercial success. It’s therefore no surprise that the Chelsea
Hotel played a featured role in the 1996 film I Shot Andy
Warhol, which re-created the late artist’s 1960s heyday. The
Chelsea can also be seen on screen as one of the spots where
Mickey Rourke and Kim Basinger play out their short-lived but
very intense sadomasochistic relationship in Adrian Lyne’s kinky
9% Weeks (1986).
That same year, the Chelsea also played a big role in Sid and
Nancy, the 1986 British film, set in the 1970s, that focuses on the
druggy life and times of Sex Pistols rock star Sid Vicious (played
by Gary Oldman), anda year later, in an ironic bit of filmmaking coming full-circle, the hotel was featured in the low-budget
film Anna, starring Warhol actress Sally Kirkland.
More Chelsea movies include The House on Carroll Street
(1988); The Professional (aka Léon), where its dramatic stairwell and corridors were combined with another location on East
97th Street to create the gritty apartment building where Natalie
Portman and Jean Reno both lived in Luc Besson’s 1994 thriller;
and Small Time Crooks (2000).
Visit www.hotelchelsea.com.


UNION

15.

SQUARE/GRAMERCY

CHELSEA

TELEVISION

221

26th

West

PARK/CHELSEA

231

STUDIOS

Street

This brick barn of a building was originally headquarters for the
city’s Ninth Mounted Cavalry division. When the unit moved to
14th Street in 1914, pioneer film producer Adolph Zukor found
the spacious armory—which came complete with a tethering
ring for its former equine occupants—a great place for making
movies, and he turned it into a studio for his Famous Players
Film Company. Featuring “Famous Players in Famous Plays,”
Zukor’s company relied on talent from the New York stage, and
his was the first movie company to bring Broadway matinee idol
John Barrymore to the screen in An American Citizen and That
Man from Mexico, both of which were produced on 26th Street
in 1914. Other early Famous Players names were Marguerite
Clark, Hazel Dawn, May Irving, and H. B. Warner.
Famous Players’ biggest star was Mary Pickford, although by

Famous

Players Film Company, ca. 1915


232

NEW

YORK:

THE

MONMIE

LOVERS

IGUNIDIE

the time Zukor scooped her up in 1913, she had already made
her mark both on Broadway and in films. A clever businesswoman, “Little Mary” made film-business history in 1916 when
Zukor signed her to a then unprecedented two-year, $2-millionplus contract. It was also in 1916 that Zukor’s Famous Players
merged with Jesse Lasky and Samuel Goldwyn to form the company that eventually became Paramount Pictures. Zukor continued to use the 26th Street studios, along with various other
facilities in the city, until the end of the 1910s, at which time, the

Famous Players-Lasky Company consolidated their operations
into one large new studio complex in Astoria, Queens.
From 1920 on, the old Famous Players studio on West 26th
Street had various incarnations, but in the 1950s the place
wound up back in the movie business when producer Hyman
Brown bought the property, gutted it, and created two soundstages inside. Since then, the facility, known for decades as
Production-Center Studios, has seen constant movie/TV activity.
Among the features that have been shot here since the 1950s are
MGM's Butterfield 8 (1960), Sidney Lumet’s Twelve Angry Men
(1957), Long Day’s Journey into Night (1961), The Anderson
Tapes (1971), William Friedkin’s The Night They Raided Minsky’s (1968), The Boys in the Band (1970), The French Connection (1971), Mel Brooks’s The Producers (1967), and Francis
Ford Coppola’s You’re a Big Boy Now (1967), which he pre-

sented as his thesis for his Master of Fine Arts at UCLA. The studio’s TV hits have included Phil Silvers’s Sergeant Bilko series,
CBS’s Show of the Week, The Patty Duke Show, Inner Sanctum,

and episodes of Jackie Gleason’s The Honeymooners. From the
early 1970s to the late 1990s, the CBS soap opera The Guiding Light was based at the historic studio, which today as the
Chelsea Television Studios is home to the Ricki Lake show and
Judge Hatchett.
16.

KINETOSCOPE
1155

PARLOR

SITE

Broadway

On April 6, 1894, the Holland Brothers’ Kinetoscope Parlor
opened ina storefront in a small brick building on the southwest
corner of 27th Street and Broadway. A great illuminated dragon


UNION

SQUARE/GRAMERCY

PARK/CHELSEA

255

Inside a Kinetoscope parlor, ca. 1895
aS
aa
EET
EE
ENED

CE

with green eyes and a red tongue was suspended above the entrance and invited customers inside to see the latest bit of wizardry from Thomas Edison: a peep show-like contraption, called
a Kinetoscope, which provided the public with its first glance at
true motion pictures. The films lasted less than a minute and documented such simple scenes as a man sneezing, a woman dancing, or a baby being given a bath, but it wasn’t the subject matter
that pulled the crowds in to 1155 Broadway; it was the novelty,
indeed the magic, of seeing real life captured on celluloid. The
Kinetoscope parlors were an overnight sensation, and they
quickly proliferated all across the country. Their moment in the
sun was brief, however, for just two years later Edison unveiled
his first projector, the Vitascope, and this turned movies from
private peep shows into public spectacles. But the Kinetoscope
parlor paved the way for films as we know them, and thus 1155
Broadway is a very important site in the history of the movies.
Today, a small hotel occupies the site.


234

NEW

YORK:

17.

METROPOLITAN

LIFE

11 Madison

THE

MOVIE

INSURANCE

LOVERS

(GUMiDIE

COMPANY

Square

It was in this monumental Manhattan office building that the
Vietnam vet/janitor played by William Hurt supposedly swept up
and mopped marble floors in the 1981 thriller Eyewitness. It was
also here that a Vietnamese businessman was brutally murdered
at the beginning of the film, which is the incident that ultimately
gets Hurt involved with TV news reporter Sigourney Weaver.
The location where much of Eyewitness was shot is the handsome 1932 North Building of the Metropolitan Life Insurance
Company. An especially dramatic architectural feature of the
building is its set of four massive arcaded, golden-gated entryways—one on each corner of the block-square structure. For
Eyewitness, director Peter Yates made extensive use of the south-

west entrance, which provided an intriguing backdrop for the sequences where Ms. Weaver and her camera crew interview Hurt
after the murder. The fact that Madison Square is just across the
street was an added attraction of the location, since it offered an
interesting space for Hurt to park his motorcycle, and the beautiful Greek temple-like building of the Appellate Division of the

Ae

Sigourney Weaver with Eyewitness William Hurt outside the
Metropolitan Life Building, 1981


UNION

SQUARE/GRAMERCY

PARK/CHELSEA

235

New York State Supreme Court next door was icing on the cake,
further adding to Eyewitness’s visual appeal.
Other directors to cash in on the Metropolitan Life’s cinematic assets have been Martin Scorsese, who made it Griffin
Dunne’s office in After Hours (1985); Woody Allen, who used
it to represent a broadcasting network building in Radio Days
(1986); Robert Clane, who set up Andrew McCarthy and Jonathan Silverman in business here for his 1989 black comedy
Weekend at Bernie’s; and Terry Gilliam, who made it the gilded,
gated workplace for the object of street person Robin Williams’s
affection (Amanda Plummer) in The Fisher King (1991).
18.

BELLEVUE
First

HOSPITAL

Avenue

from

CENTER

25th

to

30th

Streets

To millions of movie and TV lovers, the word “Bellevue” is synonymous with psycho ward. And no wonder: In Miracle on 34th
Street (1947), Macy’s eccentric Kris Kringle is sent to Bellevue
for observation; in The Lost Weekend (1945), the chronic alcoholic played by Ray Milland has a very bad time of it in Bellevue’s detox unit. It’s also where Dracula (George Hamilton) is
committed in Love at First Bite (1979) and where, according to
a line in the script, the deranged psychiatrist played by Michael
Caine in Dressed to Kill (1980) supposedly “did some work.”
Although Bellevue is best known for its psychiatric section, it is
actually a vast and diverse New York City health-care facility.
Tracing its beginnings to 1736, it is also the oldest general hospital on the North American continent.
Recent films that have been admitted to this famous hospital include The Devil’s Advocate (1997), Conspiracy Theory (1997),
City Hall (1998), Meet Joe Black (1998), Last Days of Disco
(1998), Autumn in New York (2000), Igby Goes Down (2002),
and The Yards (2002)—but the motion picture that best captured
the scope of Bellevue’s operations was undoubtedly the 1950
Universal-International film noir The Sleeping City. Shot totally on
location at the historic hospital, the film takes us on a two-hour
tour that provides insider glimpses of rarely seen areas such as the
residents’ dorms, the chapel, cocktail lounge, pool room, trauma
ward, basement, and Victorian rooftop (where the film’s dramatic
climax takes place). Almost as interesting as The Sleeping City is


236

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVEIR®S

GUIDE

the disclaimer that precedes it. It seems that when Bellevue officials
saw the film—which deals with drugs, blackmail, and murder inside Bellevue—they became quite upset. In order to appease the
hospital authorities and to get The Sleeping City into release,
Universal-International had to shoot a special opening sequence in
which the film’s star, Richard Conte, assured the audience that
what they were about to see on-screen was totally fictitious. In

what then amounted to a commercial for the hospital, Conte went
on to extol the virtues of the real Bellevue and wound up showing
architectural renderings of the additions that hospital administrators planned to build around the haunting, original Victorian brick
buildings used so effectively in The Sleeping City.
19.

MARBLE

1 West

COLLEGIATE

29th

Street/272

CHURCH

Fifth

Avenue

One of New York’s prettiest churches, this landmark 1854 neoGothic was the longtime base of pop preacher, the late Dr. Norman Vincent Peale, who was frequently seen on television in the
1960s and 1970s. Marble Collegiate’s biggest media event, however, took place in March 2002, when Liza Minnelli, after a brush

with death, a major weight loss, a possible face-lift, and a stint in
rehab, got married for the fourth time to concert promoter David
Gest. Despite the fact that the bride had just turned fifty-six, it
was one of those weddings that little girls dream of: gorgeous
ivory gown (Bob Mackie), beautiful flower-filled church (Marble
Collegiate), fifteen bridesmaids ...the works! It was also the
kind of event the tabloids dream of, and Minnelli and Gest, perhaps realizing this fact, gave the U.K.’s trashy OK! magazine exclusive photo rights for reportedly close to $1 million. And what
photos they were—from Liza and her rumored-to-be-gay husband’s multiminute lizard kiss at the altar to the motley B-list
wedding party—which included a white-haired Elizabeth Taylor
and toy soldier—attired best man Michael Jackson. Then there
were the real dinosaurs—like poor Jane Russell, gossip columnist
Cindy Adams, and Gina Lollobrigida. And the stories: matron of
honor Liz’s delaying the ceremony by almost an hour because she
had forgotten her shoes and gofers had to be sent back to her hotel to get them. But the biggest tabloid feast came seventeen
months after the Marble Collegiate affair, when reports surfaced


UNION

SQUARE/GRAMERCY

PARK/CHELSEA

237

Site of Minnelli marriage

number 4: Marble
Collegiate Church

that the Gests were splitting. These were followed by Mr. Gest’s
$10 million lawsuit claiming that Liza mentally and physically
abused him, treating him like a punching bag, pummeling and
slapping him during her alleged booze-fueled rages. Even though
it took place in New York, this was the Hollywood wedding to
end all weddings, or as Vanity Fair writer Dominick Dunne put it,
it was “one of the great sustained camp events of the decade.”
Visit www.marblechurch.org.

20.

CHURCH
1 East

OF

29th

THE

TRANSFIGURATON

Street

Nicknamed the Little Church Around the Corner, this pretty little mid-eighteenth-century Episcopal Church with its lovely garden has always been popular with theater folk. Supposedly the
reason is that in 1870, a nearby church refused to bury an actor
and suggested the rites be held at “the little church around the


238

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER7S

SGIUIDE

corner.” Among the most famous former members of the congregation are Gertrude Lawrence and Edwin Booth, both of whom
are remembered in stained-glass windows. A more recent showbiz connection involves the randy Samantha (Kim Cattrall) of
Sex and the City notoriety, who fancied (and struck out with)
one of the church’s handsome priests, whom she dubbed “the
Friar.” For the series, the church converted temporarily to Roman Catholicism. The historic church—which gave shelter to
runaway slaves during the Civil War era—was also the site of Susan Sarandon’s funeral in Igby Goes Down (2001).
Visit www.littlechurch.org.

21. MARTHA
30

East

WASHINGTON
30th

HOTEL/THIRTY

THIRTY

HOTEL

Street

When it opened at the beginning of the twentieth century, this
small Murray Hill hotel was the Martha Washington Hotel for
Women and offered safe and respectable accommodation for
single women travelers and residents. It is best known to cult
movie lovers, however, as the first stop in Barbara Parkins’s

odyssey from a small town in New England to the Big-Apple
Big Time in the 1967 camp classic screen version of Jacqueline
Susann’s equally over-the-top novel, Valley of the Dolls. Today,
the Martha Washington has been spiffed up for the new millennium and renamed for its unique address.
Visit www.thirtythirty-nyc.com.

22.

AMERICAN
120

Madison

ACADEMY

OF

DRAMATIC

ARTS

Avenue

This landmark 1905 Georgian building was designed by Stanford White for the ultra-exclusive women’s club the Colony.
Since 1963, however, it has been headquarters for the American
Academy of Dramatic Arts, which had been based at the ANTA
Theater (now the Virginia) on West 52nd Street and before that
had operated out of a basement studio at Carnegie Hall. Actress
Helen Hayes was very influential in orchestrating, and helping to


UNION

SQUARE/GRAMERCY

PARK/CHELSEA

239

raise the funds for, the Academy’s move to Madison Avenue, and
today the Academy’s theater is named in honor of Miss Hayes’s
actress daughter, Mary MacArthur, who died of bulbar polio in
1949 when she was just nineteen years old.
Founded in 1884, the American Academy of Dramatic Arts
claims to be “the oldest school of professional dramatic training
in the English-speaking world.” The number of pros who have
studied with the institution over the years is staggering. In 2003,
AADA graduate Adrian Brody won the Academy Award for Best
Actor for his performance in The Pianist. Among the school’s
other big names: Lauren Bacall, Jim Backus, Conrad Bain, Anne
Bancroft, John Cassavetes, Hume Cronyn, Robert Cummings,
Brad Davis, Kim Cattrall, Cecil B. DeMille, William Devane,
Danny DeVito, Colleen Dewhurst, Kirk Douglas, Vincent Edwards, James Farentino, Ruth Gordon, David Hartman, Florence
Henderson, Judd Hirsch, Kate Jackson, John James, Jennifer
Jones, Grace Kelly, Dina Merrill, Elizabeth Montgomery, Agnes
Moorehead, Don Murray, William Powell, Robert Redford, Don
Rickles, Thelma Ritter, Jason Robards, Eric Roberts, Edward G.
Robinson, Gena Rowlands, Rosalind Russell, John Savage, John
Saxon, Joseph Schildkraut, Loretta Swit, Renée Taylor, Spencer
Tracy, Claire Trevor, Robert Walker, and Peter Weller.
Visit www.aada.org.

os

AAD A

HALL

OF

FPAME

QY0v12

WW]

Can you match these famous former students’ names to their
faces? (See bottom of page for the answers.)
1. Kirk Douglas

7. Rosalind Russell

2. Agnes Moorehead

8.

Robert Redford

3. Jim Backus
4. Joseph Schildkraut

9.

Edward G. Robinson

10.

Danny DeVito

5. Cecil B. DeMille

Tl. Grace Kelly

6.

12.

Spencer Tracy
LCC

OM

GaulS

‘CAO.9

Anne Bancroft
VG)

She

Ole

se

Caaalee

1SAOMSUY




29
a2

— venueA

Square
—Tompkins

N
&

rit sale
istAven

SS

SS

|

‘N

=

Sweet
Houston

NN
Ss

ist

%

N

]

~ Second Avenue
i

Bea

St

oS

0

ea

ee

ee,No

4

~KrowW
t ON

:

Third Avenue

;

és

wor

cour“tye?
88 :

en

Set

LN
Broadway

~ UniversityPr
+t
Ww
Nn
Ww

Fifth Avenue

S
S

Se
11 eS
=

=

Baas

—

SS

N

=

N
N

S

Street
Houston

__ Avenue of the Americas”
>

Seventh Avenue

Ninth Avenue:

eos

|Bistict
‘Meatpacking

Jeffrey
Ward
L.
©
2004
