The Upper East Side:
Beverly Hills East
What becomes a legend most? Often an Upper East Side address.
Throughout the last century, this chic, ultraexclusive part of Manhattan—with its solid apartment buildings, discreet hotels, and lavish townhouses—has been home to some of the biggest names in
the movies. Times have changed, however, since today’s hot new
celebs prefer to hang their Prada in the much cooler neighborhoods
of Chelsea, the West Village, SoHo, and TriBeCa. But for anyone
interested in Old Hollywood, a visit to the Upper East Side provides a chance to check out the Manhattan digs that legends like
Garbo, Gish, Hepburn, Loy, Swanson, Dietrich, Crawford, and
Monroe ultimately preferred to Southern California’s sunshine.
Among the numerous other treats awaiting movie lovers on the
Upper East Side are Woody Allen’s favorite restaurant, the most
sought-after couturier of the stars, the secret location of The House
on 92nd Street, and the world’s most celebrated funeral parlor.
1. TWENTIETH
320

East

CENTURY

48th

GARAGE

Street

This is no ordinary parking garage. For movie lovers, this brick
fortress with the distinctive neon sign was once the site of the
Norma Talmadge Film Company. Named for one of the bright-

Ey

oS é

URUDISEDo.4

=

oe

wO}OUIye}
anuany

=

be

=o

;

1Su4 anuany

puodas anuany
ne eS

i

ee=

pled
anuany

plu] anuany

1n

ad

Uosipeyy

2

=

anuany

=

anuany.

_

= oO

Yyty

os

10,

ANUaAy

2507 YOALY

.

No

—

Wey puy

We)

anuany

Metropolitan
Museum of Art

fea

oo

SBnae

© 2004 Jeffrey L. Ward

ZinyasMed BS

PEE

UIP eRe EAS Ts) DIES

BIEN EIRIENG HWE LES: EAST

149

est stars in silent pictures, the studio was controlled by producer
Joe Schenck, who was Miss Talmadge’s husband as well as her
mentor. In addition, Schenck also guided the careers of Norma’s
famous sister, Constance, and had comics Fatty Arbuckle and
Buster Keaton under contract too. At any one time, all four of
these legendary performers might be shooting films on the four
floors of the Norma Talmadge Studios, which writer Anita Loos,

who worked on scenarios for Schenck, described as “as lively as
a Keystone farce.”
By the 1930s, the Norma Talmadge Studio had become the
De Forrest Photo Films Company, and both of the Talmadge sisters had retired from films. Norma, who never lost her Brooklyn
accent, bombed in the couple of sound pictures that she made.
Divorced from Schenck in 1927, she stayed briefly on the edge of
the limelight by marrying comedian George Jessel in 1931. Constance, on the other hand, was wise enough to retire from the
screen without uttering a word.

The career of Joe Schenck was another story. In 1933 he
formed the Twentieth Century Picture Corporation with Darryl
Zanuck. Two years later, Twentieth Century merged with William Fox to become Twentieth Century-Fox, where Schenck remained a major mogul for the next two decades and where he
was especially helpful in getting the career of a beautiful young
contract player named Marilyn Monroe off the ground. Schenck
died in Hollywood in 1961.
Today there is no Joe Schenck building to remember this
influential producer’s New York beginnings. There is, however,
the Twentieth Century Garage, which bears the same name as
one of his major ventures.
2. TURTLE

BAY

GARDENS

49th

48th

and

Third

Avenues

Streets

between

Second

and

A very special place to live, Turtle Bay Gardens is made up of the
blocks of townhouses on 48th and 49th streets between Second
and Third avenues. What makes them special is the fact that each
house not only has its own private garden in back, but all share
a large communal garden as well. For movie lovers, the most

150

NEW

YORK?

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’

S{GUIDE

Katharine Hepburn’s
a ——_~,,

Turtle Bay townhouse

famous resident of this charmed Manhattan neighborhood was
the late Katharine Hepburn, who lived in the same four-story
brownstone with the black wrought-iron gates and whitecurtained windows at 244 East 49th Street for over half a cen-

tury.
Over the years, Miss Hepburn had a number of famous neighbors. Composer Stephen Sondheim was next door at number
246 and writer Garson Kanin and his writer/actress wife Ruth
Gordon once lived on the same block. They were best of friends
until Mr. Kanin wrote Tracy and Hepburn in 1971, aliterary
endeavor that the very private Kate is said not to have appreciated. The headstrong Miss Hepburn was not a woman to be
crossed, A case in point concerns a burglar who, in the late
1930s, broke into her Turtle Bay house while she was napping
and was about to make off with a $5,000 necklace that her

BHESUP

PER

IEASTe sliDE:

IBEVEREY

IHS!

EAS7

151

man-friend at the time, Howard Hughes, had given her. Waking
up in the knick of time, Hepburn bellowed at the thief: “What
are you doing here?” She then chased him into the street, where
he hopped into a getaway car—without the necklace.
Hepburn died in 2003 at her other longtime residence, her
family summer home in Old Saybrook, Connecticut.
Visit www.turtlebay-nyc.org.

3. UNITED
860

and

NATIONS
870

PLAZA

United

APARTMENTS

Nations

Plaza

Around the corner from the low-rise townhouses and apartments
of Beekman Place, the twin glass skyscrapers of the United Nations Plaza Apartments at 49th Street and First Avenue, just
north of the United Nations, offer not only luxurious housing
but extraordinary floor-to-ceiling views of the city. Built in 1966,
the U.N. Plaza instantly attracted a number of celebrities to
its posh pads. Among its star tenants over the last two decades
have been Johnny Carson (during The Tonight Show’s Manhattan days), the late Truman Capote (“living on Cold Blood
money,” is the way Helen Hayes once put it), Cliff Robertson
and Dina Merrill (before they split), Mickey Rooney (who sub-

let here during his triumphant Broadway run in Sugar Babies),
the late producer David Susskind, tennis star Vitas Gerulaitis,
photographer/film director Gordon Parks (Shaft), Academy
Award-winning director Michael Cimino (The Deer Hunter),
TV host Hugh Downs, and the late Sen. Robert Kennedy.
4. ST.
109

BARTHOLOMEW’S

CHURCH

East

at

50th

Street

Park

Avenue

This exotic neo-Byzantine Episcopal house of worship—with a
columned Romanesque entrance salvaged from the church’s former 24th Street location—strikes a handsome pose on Park Avenue. Indeed, even though it’s used only as background, it’s still
easy to spot in such recent films as Maid in Manhattan (2003),
Catch Me If You Can (2002), and Serendipity (2001). It plays
much meatier roles in two earlier films, however. Ironically, each

Sz

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

AS
WaTY
PTL
e ay
go

fi oe
Ms

ze

St. Bartholomew’s

pill,

Church

involves a wedding that doesn’t come off. In Arthur (1981),
Dudley Moore jilts Jill Eikenberry at the St. Bart’s altar, whereas
fifteen years later Steve Guttenberg does the same thing to bridefrom-hell Jane Sibbett (featured on Friends as Ross’s ex-wife) in
favor of Kirstie Alley in It Takes Two (1995). Movie lovers may
wish to make a special visit to pay their respects to silent-screen
star and former St. Bart’s member Lillian Gish, whose ashes are

buried here in a basement chapel alongside those of her actress
sister, Dorothy, and stage mother, Mary. Lillian Gish, who died
in 1993, also had an impressive stage and post-silent-film career,
making her final screen appearance at the age of ninety-one (or
ninety-four, if we are to believe the dates—1893-1993— incised
on her crypt), opposite Bette Davis and Ann Sothern, in The
Whales of August (1987). Today, an anonymous admirer sends
flowers to the Gish crypt every year on her birthday, October 14.
Visit www.stbarts.org.

5. WALDORF-ASTORIA
301

Park

HOTEL

Avenue

One of the world’s grandest Art Deco structures, Park Avenue’s
monumental Waldorf-Astoria went up in 1931 as a replacement
for the original Waldorf-Astoria, which had been at 34th Street
and Fifth Avenue and was demolished to make way for the Em-

iE BUIP PIERS EA SHerol DE

(BIE WEIRUEY! IHNEES:

EAST

153

pire State Building. With 2,200 rooms when it opened (the number has since been reduced to 1,800), the new Waldorf was the

largest hotel in the world, and over the years it would host practically every major VIP on earth—from heads of state to heads of
studios. The hotel’s presidential suite is world-famous and, unlike the presidential suites of many hotels, has actually put up
every U.S. president since Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Of all the Waldorf’s accommodations, by far the most fashionable for non-chief executives are the 113 apartments that
comprise the legendary Waldorf Towers. Literally a hotel within
a hotel, the Towers has its own private entrance on East 50th
Street, its own concierges, its own discreet style. Among the
Towers’ most celebrated long-term tenants have been the Duke
and Duchess of Windsor, Richard Nixon, Henry Kissinger, Cole

Working girl: Jennifer Lopez
at the Waldorf in Maid in
Manhattan, 2003

154

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Porter, Gregory Peck, Frank Sinatra, and Marilyn Monroe, who
had a four-room apartment here in 1955 after she fled Hollywood stardom for the life of an acting student in New York.
While the Waldorf, with its twin Deco towers and its sleek
Moderne lines, is extremely impressive from the outside, the interior of the hotel is the real showstopper. The lavish lobby is a
dream of mahogany-paneled walls, marble floors and columns,
monumental urns, streamlined sconces and chandeliers. Stepping
inside this dramatic space is like walking into a glamorous 1930s
Hollywood movie. Hard-core movie lovers may, in fact, remember a 1940s film from MGM that took advantage of the Waldorf’s Deco dazzle. A postwar take on the studio’s classic early
talkie, Grand Hotel, MGM’s Weekend at the Waldorf (1945)
had an incredible lineup of stars that included Ginger Rogers,
Lana Turner, Walter Pidgeon, Van Johnson, Keenan Wynn, Robert Benchley, and even Xavier Cugat. Although the film received
mixed reviews, most critics cited the fine performance turned in

by the Waldorf. Indeed, if the film does little else, it provides a
fascinating behind-the-scenes glimpse at the workings of a great
hotel, with second-unit sequences filmed in such rarely visited
areas as the garage, the massive telephone switchboard, the inhotel police station, the secretarial pool, and the kennels. Weekend at the Waldorf is also a triumph of MGM art direction,
because it is practically impossible to tell which scenes have been
shot by the second-unit crew on location and which were done
at the MGM studios in Culver City, where much of the Waldorf’s
splendor was painstakingly re-created.
In more recent years, the grand ballrooms and luxurious
suites of the Waldorf have been featured in such films as The
Out-of-Towners—the Waldorf is where Sandy Dennis and Jack
Lemmon should have stayed in the wacky 1970 Neil Simon story
about all the things that can go wrong on avisit to the Big Apple; Rich and Famous (1981), the George Cukor film in which
best-selling novelist Candice Bergen rents a whole floor; Scent of
a Woman (1992), where blind veteran Al Pacino chooses the best
hotel in town for what he expects to be his final fling in the Big
Apple; The Royal Tenenbaums (2002), as the Lindbergh Palace
Hotel, which estranged Tenenbaum family scion Royal (Gene
Hackman) calls home, until he’s thrown out; Serendipity (2001),

HEU

PERI EAST

SIDES

BiEV ERIE.

HINES:

EAST

155

where John Cusack and Kate Beckinsale play a kind of Russian
roulette with their budding romance at the elevator banks, leaving it to Cupid to determine if they end up on the same floor;
and Maid in Manhattan (2003), as the fictional Beresford Hotel,
in a modern-day Cinderella story of Latino maid Jennifer Lopez
looking after the lavish suite of celebrity politician Ralph Fiennes.
While many exteriors and interiors were done at the hotel, the
suite was reproduced at Astoria Studios in Queens.
The hotel can also be seen in The Great Gatsby (1974),
My Favorite Year (1982), Six Weeks (1982), Broadway Danny
Rose (1983), Hannah and Her Sisters (1986), Coming to America (1988), Crimes and Misdemeanors (1989), The Godfather II
(1990), and Analyze This (1999).
Visit www.waldorf.com.

6. TRANS

LUX

Lexington

THEATER
Avenue

at

SITE
52nd

Street

The Trans Lux was a neighborhood movie house that stood at
586 Lexington Avenue from 1940 until the late 1970s. One hot
September evening in 1954, Hollywood director Billy Wilder
brought a film crew to the Trans Lux to shoot an exterior for
The Seven Year Itch. More important, Wilder also unleashed the
film’s superstar, Marilyn Monroe, on the streets of Manhattan.
Alerted to the event by studio publicity people, the press was on
hand en masse to document the filming, and they were joined by
a couple of thousand spectators. In the scene, Marilyn and her
downstairs neighbor, Tom Ewell, are coming out of the Trans
Lux, having just seen The Creature from the Black Lagoon.
Marilyn liked the film, but “just felt so sorry for the Creature at
the end.” Then, along comes the Lexington Avenue IRT and up
goes Marilyn’s billowy white skirt. “Oh, do you feel the breeze
from the subway?” she coos to her costar. “Isn’t it delicious?”
Meanwhile, the crowd cheered and shouted, “Higher, higher!”
as the country’s number-one sex goddess showed her panties—to
all of Lexington Avenue. One visitor definitely not amused by the
proceedings, however, was Joe DiMaggio, Marilyn’s husband of
barely nine months. Having already found life with a superstar

NEW

156

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Street theater: Marilyn
filming The Seven

Year

Itch on Lexington

Avenue, 1954

to be no picnic, DiMaggio viewed Marilyn’s Lexington Avenue
antics as the final straw. Back in Hollywood, less than a month
after the incident in New York, the DiMaggios filed for divorce.
Ironically, much of the scene that wrecked the marriage had to
be reshot on the Twentieth Century-Fox lot.
Today, movie lovers will find a gigantic office building on the
northwest corner of Lexington Avenue and 52nd Street, where
the Trans Lux once stood, but the Marilyn Monroe memorial
subway grating remains.
7. SEAGRAM
373

Park

BUILDING
Avenue

An amazing collaboration between two of the world’s greatest
architects at the time—Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and Philip
Johnson—this bronze and bronze-colored-glass landmark broke
all the architectural and real estate rules by being set far back

ibn

Ue
PEEine

EyAVS 12 SiDIES

SBiEN
BERIEYSEIMISS®

EAS Th

157

from Park Avenue to allow for a spacious pedestrian plaza and
two large fountains. Inside, the building featured a glittering
window-walled Four Seasons restaurant, with tables set around
a central fountain. The restaurant—as well as its adjacent Four
Seasons Grill—is still one of New York’s top power lunch and
romantic dinner venues. When it opened in 1959, the glamorous
new building was instantly called on by director Jean Negulesco
to use as Fabian Publishers in his movie about women working
in the glamorous world of publishing—The Best of Everything.
In the film Hope Lange goes to work at the Seagram Building for
bitchy boss Joan Crawford, in one of her many comeback roles.
The impressive thirty-eight-story structure would also come back
to the screen frequently, usually in the role of a high-powered
office building: Diane Keaton worked here in Baby Boom (1987),
for example, as did Michael J. Fox in Life with Mickey (1993);

Seagram

Building

NEW

158

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Bill Murray in Scrooged (1988), where it was the IBC Network;
and Nicolas Cage in The Family Man (2000). In Woody Allen’s
1998 Celebrity, the Seagram plaza was the site of a fabulous film
shoot featuring Melanie Griffith as the star and Winona Ryder as
an extra. The building was also used in the Douglas family ego
fest It Runs in the Family (2003), originally titled Smack in the
Kisser.
8. THE
450

CAMPANILE
East

52nd

Street

She was the world’s most public private person. Even though she
had not made a film since 1941, Greta Garbo still fascinated the

press, the masses, even the precious few who were permitted to
be her friends right up until her death in 1990 at the age of
eighty-four. Dressed in floppy hat, long trench coat, and trademark dark-dark glasses, she prowled about Manhattan, darting
in and out of doorways, peeking at shop windows, occasionally

=) Queen of 52nd Street:
glorious Garbo

PHEVUP

EERE EAS Te Ss! DE:

BEV EIRIEY

HES

EAS Tt

159

attending a film at the Plaza Theater on East 58th Street. For
most of that time she lived in a seven-room apartment in the
Campanile, a small 1920s brick building with Gothic arches and
leaded-glass windows on the cul-de-sac where 52nd Street meets
the East River. While Garbo’s neighbors over the years included
such notables as Alexander Woollcott (Dorothy Parker dubbed
the building “Wit’s End”), Rex Harrison, Henry and Clare
Boothe Luce, by far her most interesting fellow tenants were the
Russian couturier Valentina and her millionaire husband George
Schlee.
In an arrangement straight out of neighbor Noél Coward’s
play Design for Living, Garbo had an intense personal relationship with Mr. Schlee from the mid-1940s until his death in 1964.
He was not only her financial adviser, he was her escort, her confidant, and often her traveling companion. All the while, Schlee
remained married to Valentina, who not only made Garbo’s
clothes but sometimes accompanied Schlee and the former movie
actress on social outings. The whole arrangement was eminently
civilized but fell apart rather abruptly when Schlee was stricken
with a fatal heart attack while staying at the Crillon Hotel in
Paris, where he and Garbo had adjoining suites. When Garbo
discovered that Schlee was dead, she reportedly ran from the hotel and left Valentina to deal with the messy details involved with
death in a foreign country. Garbo’s irresponsible behavior is said
to have so angered Valentina that she made it clear that she
didn’t want the actress to attend her husband’s funeral. The two
remained neighbors at 450 East 52nd Street for years thereafter
but reportedly never again exchanged a word.
When Garbo died, although she hadn’t worked for almost
half a century, she left an estate of some $200 million, thanks in
large part to her clever investments, especially in property (she is
said to have owned much of Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills at one
time). Visitors to her native Sweden can see a room of her East

52nd Street flat on display next to the men’s room in the basement of the PUB department store, where the original superstar
once worked as a hat model and salesgirl. They can also visit
beautiful Skogskyrkogérden Cemetery in southern Stockholm,
where Garbo’s ashes were interred in 1999 near the graves of her

parents.

160

NEW

9. RIVER
435

YORK!

THE

MOVIE,

LOVERS

GUIDE

HOUSE

East

52nd

Street

Protected by an ornate iron gate that opens onto a formal driveway, River House is one of the fashionable East Side’s most prestigious addresses. Besides great privacy and security, the building
also provides its residents with such luxuries as squash and tennis courts, a swimming pool, a ballroom, and, in the days before
the FDR Drive skirted the East River, River House even had its
own private boat dock. Like many Manhattan apartment build-

ings, River House is a cooperative, which means that its tenants
own shares in the building and have a say in its affairs via an
elected board of directors. Since the board at River House has
traditionally been a conservative lot, the building is sometimes
better known for the people who have been refused apartments
than for those who actually reside here.
Among the former group, celebrity fashion designer (and former actress) Gloria Vanderbilt had a rough go of it at River
House in 1980, when the board denied her an apartment, reportedly because her finances weren’t up to River House standards.
The multimillionaire then sued River House, alleging that the
real reason she had been refused the apartment was because
she enjoyed a close friendship with black cabaret singer Bobby
Short. River House denied that racism had entered into its decision, but did acknowledge that it thought Miss Vanderbilt’s high
profile in Manhattan society would bring “unwelcome publicity” to the building. Little Gloria eventually dropped the suit,
and was happy at last when she found friendlier digs up on Gracie Square.
Among the celebrities that did meet River House standards

were former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and his wife
Nancy; actress/author/diplomat Clare Boothe Luce, whose play
The Women was turned into MGM’s all-star movie of the same
name in 1939; director Joshua Logan of Mr. Roberts, Picnic, Bus
Stop, Sayonara, and South Pacific fame; and, reportedly, Charlie
Chaplin.

PHEW

10.

RE

RAEAST TS DES

NEIGHBORHOOD

BEVEREY

PLAYHOUSE

HINES

BAST

SCHOOL

161

OF

THEATER
340

East

54th

Street

In 1915 the Neighborhood Playhouse was established as an
amateur theater group on Manhattan’s Lower East Side. It was
one of many projects in the Henry Street Settlement’s fight to
improve the lot of slum dwellers. Although the original Neighborhood Playhouse closed in 1928, the acting school that grew
out of it has flourished ever since. Located in a handsome double townhouse on the Upper East Side since 1948, the Neighborhood Playhouse School of Theater counts among its famous
former students Gregory Peck, Tyrone Power, Diane Keaton,
Robert Duvall, Lorne Greene, Elizabeth Ashley, Eli Wallach,
Anne Jackson, Keir Dullea, James Caan, Joanne Woodward, Jeff
Goldblum, Griffin Dunne, Tammy Grimes, Efrem Zimbalist Jr.,
Dabney Coleman, Brenda Vaccaro, Suzanne Pleshette, Darren
McGavin, Patrick O’Neal, Pamela Bellwood, Mary Steenburgen,
Lee Grant, and director Sydney Pollack. For many years, besides
its star students, the school was noted for its legendary acting
teacher, the late Sanford Meisner, whose techniques are currently
very much in vogue both in the United States and the United
Kingdom.
Visit www.the-neiplay.org.

11. P. J. CLARKE’S
913

Third

Avenue

Third Avenue today is a busy boulevard that shows off some of
Manhattan’s sleekest skyscrapers. It’s a far cry from the old Third
Avenue with its low-rise brick tenement buildings and low-lit
neighborhood pubs, all in the shadow of the overhead tracks of the
famous Third Avenue El. One of the few vestiges of the old Third
Avenue is a two-story brick building on the northeast corner of
55th Street that still houses P. J. Clarke’s bar. Founded in the early
twentieth century by an Irish immigrant bartender named Patrick J.
Clarke, this archetypal New York neighborhood pub, P. J.’s—with
its tin ceiling, beveled mirrors, and wood-paneled walls hung with

162

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

sports photos—is a casual place for a business lunch or a happyhour cocktail. There are many legends surrounding P. J. Clarke’s. It
was here that Buddy Holly proposed to Maria Elena Santiago,
whom he later married. It’s also said that Johnny Mercer wrote his
famous hit song “One for My Baby” on a napkin while sitting at
the bar. And when the late Richard Harris, a regular whenever he
was in New York, showed up and asked for “the usual,” the bartender simply lined up six double vodkas.
But for movie lovers, P.J.’s is of particular interest because it
served as Nat’s Bar in Billy Wilder’s classic 1945 film about alcoholism, The Lost Weekend. Or so the legend goes. In reality,
none of the footage shot at the bar could be used because of the
noise of the El running overhead, so the bar was re-created on a
Paramount soundstage in Hollywood. What Wilder couldn’t duplicate in Hollywood, however, was the long sequence in The
Lost Weekend where a desperate Ray Milland staggers up Third
Avenue trying to pawn his typewriter. Shooting early in the
mornings, Wilder, cameraman John Seitz, and Milland spent two
weeks and covered sixty-five blocks of Third Avenue sidewalks

Third Avenue classic: P. J. Clarke’s

PAE SUP Pere EASTe Sil DiEe

Bie WE RIEHL ISS: EAST

163

Ray Milland shooting The Lost Weekend on Third Avenue, 1945
SES

ee

es a

SRE

ee

working on this famous scene in which Milland can’t find an
open pawnshop because it’s Yom Kippur, the holiest day of the
Jewish religious calendar. For Milland the shooting was particularly grueling, and he was reported to have been “muscle sore,
chest-foundered, and swaybacked” by the time it was over. In
fact, when the company returned to Hollywood, Milland was in
such bad shape that they had to shoot around him for three days
until he got rid of the limp he had developed from pounding the
Third Avenue pavements with typewriter in hand. But ultimately
it was worth the pain, because Milland won an Academy Award
for his performance in The Lost Weekend.
As for P. J. Clarke’s, it has weathered several brushes with the
wrecker’s ball, the most recent being in early 2002, when the
legendary bar closed down. Happily, a syndicate of heavy-hitter
investors—including actor Timothy Hutton and _ high-profile
New York Yankees owner George Steinbrenner—took it over, restored it, and reopened it a year later.
Visit www.pjclarkes.com.

NEW

164

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Sutton Place sirens: Marilyn Monroe, Betty Grable, and Lauren Bacall
with

Cameron

12. HOW
36

Mitchell in How to Marry a Millionaire, 1953

TO

MARRY

Sutton

Place

A MILLIONAIRE

APARTMENT

South

They were three of the most glamorous gold diggers ever to
go prospecting in Manhattan—Lauren Bacall, Betty Grable, and
Marilyn Monroe—and their ensemble aim was quite simple:
Each wanted to tap into the life of the richest man she could
find. To do this, they needed a base of operations that would fit
their decidedly upscale aspirations. Or, as Bacall bellowed early
on in the film: “To catch a mouse, you use a mousetrap ... to
catch a bear, you use a bear trap.” The three beauties found
the ideal bear trap in a palatial penthouse that was available for
sublet on posh Sutton Place. It cost $1,000 a month—a lot of
money back in 1953—but it had bedrooms and terraces for
days, and it came completely furnished. The furniture, however,
didn’t last long as the gals started selling it off piece by piece
when they discovered that marrying a millionaire was not the
easy task they had thought it would be. The luxury apartment

THE

UPPER

EAST

SIDE:

BEVERLY

HILLS

EAST

165

building used as an exterior for this classic CinemaScope comedy
from Twentieth Century-Fox still looks exactly as it did in the
film.
13.

LILLIAN

GISH

APARTMENT

430

57th

Street

East

For over half a century, this basic-brick Sutton Place apartment
building was Lillian Gish’s Manhattan home. An extraordinary
woman whose film career began in 1912 with D. W. Griffith’s Ax
Unseen Enemy, Lillian Gish appeared in such landmark silent
pictures as The Birth ofa Nation (1915), Intolerance (1916),
Way Down East (1920), Orphans of the Storm (1922), and The
Scarlet Letter (1925). When her film career slowed down in the
1930s, it was not, as it was for many of her contemporaries, on
account of the talkies, but rather because Hollywood’s taste in
heroines had changed, and virtuous virgins like Miss Gish were

Lillian Gish in The
Birth of a Nation, 1915

NEW

166

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

ROVERS

GUIDE

no longer in fashion. The actress dealt with this turn of events by
concentrating on the Broadway stage, where she had a string of
successes in classical roles. Her film career was far from over,
however, for she went on to triumph as a character actress in a
number of films in the late 1940s and 1950s, from David O.
Selznick’s Duel in the Sun (1947) and Portrait of Jennie (1948)
to United Artists’ Night of the Hunter (1955). And La Gish went
on and on. Witness her roles in A Wedding (1978), Sweet Liberty (1986), and The Whales of August (1987). The actress, who

died in 1993 at the age of ninety-nine—although she only admitted to ninety-six—once said she liked living in the Sutton Place
area because “it is like a village where everyone knows you.”
14.

MARILYN

MONROE

444

57th

East

APARTMENT

Street

If you wanted to reach Marilyn Monroe in the late 1950s, you
had only to look in the Manhattan telephone directory under
“Marilyn Monroe Productions Inc., 444 E. 57... PL 9-5353.”
Marilyn moved into 444 with her third husband, playwright
Arthur Miller, in 1956, and when she died some six years later

Marilyn Monroe and Arthur Miller’s apartment building

SS

La

a

RTE EES

THE

UPPER

EAST

SIDE:

BEVERLY

HILLS

EAST

167

in Hollywood, she still held a lease on the same Sutton Place
apartment. In fact, when she made her final visit to the city in
June 1962 to sing “Happy Birthday” to President John F. Kennedy at Madison Square Garden, she stayed at 444—although
some sources reported that she spent at least part of the evening
at the Carlyle Hotel, where the president was staying without
Jackie.
Marilyn’s East 57th Street apartment was on the thirteenth
floor and had a lovely view of the East River. During the good
times of her marriage to Miller, she played housewife and
delighted in making breakfast and midmorning coffee for her
writer husband. Marilyn also played decorator and did the
whole place in white. Indeed, when she flew to California to
make Some Like It Hot in 1958, Marilyn insisted that her suite
at the Bel-Air Hotel be decorated in white to match her Manhattan home.
By early 1961, however, Marilyn’s New York apartment was
showing the strains of her personal and professional troubles.
Now divorced from Miller and a veteran of stays in several mental hospitals, Marilyn had become a semi-recluse, and her secretary reported that her once-posh pad was “filthy, dirty, and
depressing, with dog stains all over the carpets.” According to
her hairdresser, George Masters, Marilyn was “living on caviar,

champagne, and hard-boiled eggs. She could let herself look like
an old bag for two weeks. She’d smell sometimes, and never
comb her hair for weeks. That’s why it would take nine hours to
get her ready and re-create Marilyn Monroe.”
It was during this desperate period of her life that Marilyn is
said to have come close to committing suicide by jumping out of
her living room window. The reason for her extreme panic at the
time was because she had read that Clark Gable’s wife had
blamed “the King’s” recent death on the delays and tensions
caused by Marilyn’s erratic behavior while shooting The Misfits.
Marilyn didn’t jump, however, supposedly because she recognized a woman on the sidewalk below her. It was also around
this time that Marilyn finally gave up on New York—the city
that had held so much promise for her when she arrived in late
1954—and decided to go back to where she came from: Hollywood. A year later, she would give up on Hollywood, too.

NEW

168

15.

RITZ

TOWERS

Park

Avenue

YORK:

THE

57th

Street

at

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Among media mogul and early film producer William Randolph
Hearst’s many real estate holdings in Manhattan was the posh
Ritz Towers apartment hotel, a beautiful 1920s building exotically ornamented with cornices, balustrades, finials, and obelisks. It was here that Hearst and his movie-star mistress, Marion
Davies, kept a lavish suite that they often used when they were
in New York in the 1930s. While most people these days think
of Miss Davies’s film career as little more than a plaything for
Hearst, the truth of the matter is that Marion was an extremely
successful film comedian who made quite a lot of money from
her pictures and through her own shrewd investments. In fact, in
1937, she saved Hearst from bankruptcy by coming up with a
cool million of her own money. The two were staying at the Ritz
Towers at the time, and Marion spent a full day selling off her
jewelry and mortgaging her real estate to produce the cash to
bail out her buddy.
A decade later, another movie celebrity who resided at the
Ritz Towers was Greta Garbo. Her quarters were not nearly so
grand as those of her landlords, Davies and Hearst, however.

The late photographer and designer Cecil Beaton, who claims to
have had a love affair with Garbo in the late 1940s, writes in his

autobiography, Memoirs of the 40s (McGraw-Hill, 1972), that
Garbo at the Ritz “lived like a monk with little except a toothbrush, a piece of soap, and a jar of face cream.” The affair ended
when Beaton had to return to work in England. He wanted
Garbo to accompany him, but the great star refused his offer,
saying, “You see how difficult and neurotic I am. I am impossible to get on with.” Nevertheless, the two remained friends—until, of course, Beaton published his book in 1973.
16. SHERRY-NETHERLAND
781

Fifth

HOTEL

Avenue

According to columnist Earl Wilson, the late Spencer Tracy
reportedly once shocked the residents of this discreet hotel by
turning up in the lobby smashed and stark naked, in search
of a drink. Better-behaved Hollywood residents of the Sherry-

(EEO

PeReEASTs SIDE:

BEVEREY

WEES

EAST

169

Netherland have included Diana Ross, Pia Zadora, and Danny
Kaye, all of whom have owned luxurious apartments here.
The hotel was used extensively in one segment of 1989's
New York Stories, a three-films-in-one opus directed by Martin
Scorsese, Francis Ford Coppola, and Woody Allen. In the Cop-

pola segment Life Without Zoe, the title character is a young girl
left to her own devices and adventures by her superrich but always off-somewhere parents. The screenplay, by Coppola’s then
twenty-year-old daughter Sofia, was trashed by some critics at
the time. Fifteen years later, Ms. Coppola would have the last
laugh when her screenplay for Lost in Translation (2003) won
her an Academy Award. The apartment used in Life Without
Zoe was her father’s Sherry-Netherland pad at the time.
Visit htto./sherrynetherland.com.

17. THE
10

COPACABANA
East

60th

SITE

Street

Immortalized in the Barry Manilow song “Lola” (about a Copa
chorus girl), which later inspired the 1985 Emmy Awardwinning television movie called Copacabana, New York City’s
Copacabana reigned as one of the town’s most glamorous night
spots from its opening in 1940 until well into the 1950s. Among
the star performers who headlined here were Ella Fitzgerald, Sid
Caesar, Frank Sinatra, Tony Bennett, Sammy Davis Jr., Nat King
Cole, Jimmy Durante, and a couple of comics named Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis who, in 1949, broke all Copa records when
they took in $68,543 in one week. Four years before that, it took
Lena Horne to break the Copa’s color barrier, when she became
the first black entertainer to perform in the club’s posh downstairs room. It was a bittersweet achievement, however: While
the Copa allowed Miss Horne to perform, they refused to let
blacks into the audience. This resulted in picket lines and
protests and caused much grief for the star. Although she honored her contract and completed her run, from then on she made
sure that all future nightclub contracts contained a clause barring
racial discrimination at the door. The next time she played the
Copa, African Americans were part of the audience.
Movie lovers may be interested to learn that June Allyson was

170

NIEW.

ae¢/

VYORK:

THiE

IMOVIE”

FOMERZS

VGiUiIDiE

MONTE PROSER’S
~~

( wal

COPACABANA

NEW YORK

~~ MINIMUM CHARGE
Wesley floes

{Por Person)

ee

Weekdays & Sundays - $3.00
Sat., Hol. & Hol. Eves. - $4.50

Copacabana

postcard, ca. 1950

once a Copa girl, as were Joanne Dru and Janice Rule. Movie

lovers may also remember a 1947 bomb of a picture called Copacabana, in which Groucho Marx (with neither his mustache
nor his brothers) played an agent who tried to double his commission by booking his client (Carmen Miranda) into the same
New York City nightclub as two separate acts (a veiled chanteuse
and a Latin spitfire)!
Well past its prime by the late 1960s, the Copa closed down
in 1973, but has had various comebacks and incarnations
since—including several gigs playing itself in the movies. In the
1990 Martin Scorsese film Goodfellas, the Copa turns up as

the 1960s hotspot where Ray Liotta impresses wife-to-be Lorraine Bracco by avoiding the queue and taking her in through the
kitchen, dropping numerous $20 tips along the way, before being shown a front table to catch Henny Youngman’s act. Later

GHESUPPERSEAS TT? SIDE

BEV ERE

IH IEES

EAST

171

the club shows up again when the film’s merry band of mobsters
come by with their girlfriends in tow on a Friday night (Saturday night was for wives). The Copa also appeared in Brian De
Palma’s 1993 thriller Carlito’s Way as the club where Sean Penn,
as a lawyer flying on cocaine, talks a little too much about a plan
to spring a client from prison.
Today the old Copa space is now home to the sleek minimalist restaurant Nicole’s, part of smart London fashion designer
Nicole Farhi’s New York flagship store.
18.

CHRIST
Park

UNITED

Avenue

at

METHODIST
60th

CHURCH

Street

It was a fashionable affair, the marriage of socialite Frances Seymour Brokaw of 646 Park Avenue to Mr. Henry Jaynes Fonda of
Hollywood, California. The ceremony took place on September
16, 1936, at Park Avenue’s ultra-Waspy Christ United Methodist
Church, and in his autobiography Mr. Fonda says of the event:
“I don’t know if I was ready for that kind of fancy dress wedding. They got me into a black coat with swallowtails, a pair of
striped pants, an ascot around my neck, and a high silk hat on
my head. Shit! I thought any minute the director would yell,
‘Roll ’em! Action!’ ”
Henry Fonda had met Frances Brokaw earlier that year in
London, where he had been shooting Wings of the Morning. It
was love at first sight, followed by a whirlwind courtship carried
on in Berlin, Budapest, and Paris, and culminating in matrimony

on Park Avenue. There was no honeymoon, since Fonda was
scheduled to start a picture in Hollywood the next day. But while
all had been idyllic in Europe and New York, the couple ran into
problems in California. For one thing, Frances Fonda never
really fit into the town where her husband made his living and
could never settle for being just another Hollywood housewife.
Despite their problems, the Brokaw-Fonda union endured and
produced two children: Jane Seymour Fonda, born on December
21, 1937, and Peter Henry Fonda, born February 23, 1940. As
time went on, however, Mrs. Fonda’s inability to cope with life

in L.A. became more pronounced and she was plagued with
hypochondriacal illnesses that put her out of commission for

NEW

72

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

longer and longer periods of time. Even the family’s move to the
East Coast (when Fonda was starring in Mr. Roberts on Broadway in 1948) didn’t help. In fact things got worse, and by 1949
Frances Fonda was spending more time in institutions than out
of them. At the same time, her husband had met another wo-

man—Susan Blanchard—and had asked his wife for a divorce.
Mrs. Fonda granted this freely, even wished her husband good
luck. But it was she who needed the luck. In April 1950, Frances
Seymour Fonda ended her life, cutting her throat with a razor
blade that she had smuggled into the sanitarium where she had
been confined for several months. The funeral, in contrast to the

glittering wedding fourteen years earlier, took place at a funeral
home in upstate New York with only Henry Fonda and his
mother-in-law Sophie Seymour in attendance.
19.

BLOOMINGDALE’S

1000

Third

Avenue

A landmark of conspicuous consumption on the Upper East Side,
Bloomingdale’s has naturally found its way into more than a
few made-in-Manhattan movies. Notable Bloomie’s on-screen

Retail romance:

Kate Beckinsale and John Cusack at Bloomingdale’s in

Serendipity

SL

a

a

aa

ETS)

GHEVUPP

ER

EAST

SIDES

BIEVEREY

JHIELES

EAST

WS

shopping sprees include Diane Keaton and Michael Murphy’s
perfume-counter encounter in Woody Allen’s Manhattan (1979),
and the sequence in Paul Mazursky’s Moscow on the Hudson
(1984) in which the Russian musician played by Robin Williams
defects to the West, smack in the middle of this bastion of
capitalism. It’s here, too, where mermaid-in-Manhattan Darryl
Hannah’s high-pitched voice breaks TV sets when she tries to tell
Tom Hanks her name in Splash (1984), and where Barbra
Streisand has lunch with her movie-mom Lauren Bacall in The
Mirror Has Two Faces (1996), and where star-crossed lovers
John Cusack and Kate Beckinsale meet at the glove counter in
Serendipity (2001). Meanwhile, outside the Art Deco department
store, a soap opera actress named Dorothy (Dustin Hoffman)
fought for a taxicab in a most unladylike way in Sidney Lumet’s
Tootsie (1982).
Visit www.

20.

bloomingdales.com.

MONTGOMERY
217

East

61st

CLIFT

TOWNHOUSE

Street

The star of The Search (1948), Red River (1948), The Heiress
(1949), A Place in the Sun (1951), From Here to Eternity (1953),
Raintree County (1957), Suddenly, Last Summer (1959), The
Misfits (1961), and Freud (1962) lived in this four-story townhouse on East 61st Street from 1960 until his death at the age of
forty-five in 1966. The home—which Teddy Roosevelt had given

to his daughter, Alice Roosevelt Longworth, as a wedding present—had a sixty-foot living room, four bedrooms, six baths, six
fireplaces, and a big garden in back. Despite these sumptuous
surroundings, Clift’s final years were far from happy ones. In
constant pain from the injuries he had sustained in a near-fatal

automobile accident in Hollywood in 1957, the star was hooked
on drugs as well as plagued by a host of other health problems
that ranged from premature cataracts and hypothyroidism to alcoholism and insomnia. Clift was also obsessed with the loss of
his leading-man good looks and with the knowledge that both of
his costars in The Misfits, Marilyn Monroe and Clark Gable, had
recently died. Believing that bad things come in threes, he spent
the early 1960s waiting to be the next to go.

174

NEWHY

ORK]

WHE

IMOVIE

TiO WERE S Gl IDIE

Montgomery Clift townhouse

Sick, drugged, and drunk much of the time, Clift fell in with

a sex-and-drugs crowd, and his East 61st Street abode was often
the scene of some wild goings-on. Eventually when things had
gotten so out of hand that Clift reportedly would try to solicit
male sex partners by calling down to passersby from his upstairs
window, his family and doctor hired a full-time male companion
to care for the fast-fading superstar. On July 27, 1966, the light
from that star faded completely.
Soon after his death, Clift’s townhouse was sold by his sister
with the stipulation that the new owners put up a plaque in the
front of the building to read: “Montgomery Clift lived here in
1960-1966.” The buyers did as they had been asked, but became
so bothered by Clift cultists hanging around the building that

ehh]

WIP PE Re EAS tie SiiD ES

BIE VERE

SHINES!

EAS7

175

they planted a bush in front of the plaque to hide it. Today,
movie lovers passing by the former Clift townhouse will find that
the plaque has disappeared totally.
21.

TALLULAH
230

East

BANKHEAD
62nd

TOWNHOUSE

Street

She made “Dah-ling” a fashionable form of address long before the Gabors came on the scene. She drank heavily, smoked
six packs of cigarettes a day, went to bed with both men and
women, was renowned for her bawdy stories, and yet, throughout it all, Tallulah Bankhead was one great lady. She moved into
this handsome East 62nd Street townhouse in the late 1950s,

Tallulah’s townhouse

176

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

when her longtime home in the suburban community of Bedford
Village had become too difficult for her to handle. Indeed, the
lush life that Tallulah had led for four decades was starting to
catch up with her by the time she hit the Upper East Side. Despite face and bust lifts, her looks had gone, and her career was
reduced to summer stock and occasional guest shots on TV and
radio. When she was home, her favorite pastime was a game of
bridge that would last into the wee hours of the morning and
during which much alcohol would be consumed. She also liked
baseball, and could often be found at the Polo Grounds cheering
for the New York Giants.
Although Tallulah Bankhead was not a movie star per se, she
made films throughout her long career in show business. In fact,
when she arrived in Manhattan as a stagestruck fifteen-year-old
in 1918, among her very first acting jobs were roles in two silent
films, When Men Betray and Thirty a Week, both shot in nearby
Fort Lee, New Jersey. It wasn’t until 1931, however, that Tallulah’s motion-picture career began in earnest. Having become a
great star of the London stage in the 1920s, the glamorous expatriate was wooed back to her native land with a lucrative movie
contract from Paramount, which planned to market her as a second Marlene Dietrich. Back in New York, Tallulah quickly made
three films at Paramount’s Astoria studio. Despite the fact they
weren’t successful, the studio sent her to Hollywood, where she
made three more pictures. But these, too, were disappointing at
the box office, and she eventually returned to New York and to
the Broadway stage, where she enjoyed a busy career for the next
two decades. Among her legendary stage performances were as
Regina Giddens in Lillian Hellman’s The Little Foxes in 1939 (a
role that Bette Davis later played in the film version) and her portrayal of Sabina the maid in Thornton Wilder’s The Skin of Our
Teeth, which won her a New York Drama Critics Circle Award
in 1942.
A year later, just when everyone least suspected it, the unpredictable Tallulah returned to motion pictures and scored the
coup of her career in Alfred Hitchcock’s Lifeboat, winning the
New York Film Critics Award for Best Actress of 1944 for her
performance as a mink-coated reporter. During the film, Hitchcock kept getting complaints that Tallulah was not wearing un-

THE

WP PERE PASTS

SIDE.

BIEVERILY

HILES

BAST

Paramount

177

pretty:

Tallulah Bankhead,

ca. 1931

derwear—to which he famously replied: “I don’t know if this is
a matter for the costume department or the hairdresser.” Despite
her newfound film success, Tallulah was not so lucky with A
Royal Scandal, which she made the following year, and once
again she gave up on the medium in favor of radio, further forays onto Broadway, and lots of touring.
Always known for her outrageous behavior, Bankhead hardly
mellowed with age. When she guested as the Ricardos’ new
neighbor in Connecticut on I Love Lucy in the late 1950s, she
showed up with quite a few cocktails under her belt at rehearsal.
This did not amuse no-nonsense Lucille Ball, and when Bankhead peeled off her trousers—no one quite knows why—in a
meeting after Vivian Vance admired them, Ball wanted to fire her.
She was talked out of it, however—and Bankhead’s performance
was flawless when they filmed the show before alive audience,
whereas Ball supposedly blew her lines. Bankhead’s final screen
appearances were as the Black Widow in two episodes of the

NEW

178

YORK:

THIE

MOVIE

POM ERIS

FGUIDIE

1960s Batman series and as star of the 1965 British horror film
Die, Die, My Darling. At a screening of the latter, no doubt again
after a couple of cocktails, she vociferously apologized to the
audience throughout the film for looking so terrible on-screen.
She died in New York in 1968.
22.

THE

MELROSE

HOTEL

140

East

Street

63rd

Smack in the middle of the East 60s, this was one of the world’s
most fashionable boardinghouses when it opened in 1927 as the
Barbizon Hotel for Women. Although its rooms were small and
spartan simple, the twenty-seven-story hotel provided extras like
a huge swimming pool and health club, a library with a full-time
librarian, plus all sorts of club and game rooms. The hotel also
had a strict policy regarding the opposite sex: Men were not
admitted beyond the second-floor Recital Room. The Barbizon
Hotel for Women was thus a place where protective parents
could send their daughters and feel relatively untroubled about

Barbizon (now Melrose) Hotel, 1987
a

I

IEEE

iE

UIPIP IIR

AVSeS

Die} IBEW EIRIEY

SHES

EAST

179

their whereabouts in the big city. Judy Garland and Vincente
Minnelli, for example, knew teenaged Liza was in good hands
when she made the Barbizon her New York nest during the
making-the-rounds period of her career. Nor did the John Kellys
of Philadelphia have to worry too much about their daughter
Grace falling in with the wrong crowd as long as she was at the
Barbizon. Ditto for the Bergens of Beverly Hills when their sweet
Candy dropped out of the University of Pennsylvania for the
bright lights and big bucks of a Manhattan modeling career.
The Leachmans, those lumber barons of Des Moines, could
breathe easier with little Cloris based at the Barbizon when she
came to New York to try her wings on Broadway after having
been a runner-up in the Miss America pageant. The poet Sylvia

Plath, whose tragic life was portrayed by Gwyneth Paltrow in
Sylvia (2003), was another Barbizon alumna. The hotel also lists
Joan Crawford as a former famous occupant, but Joan’s Broadway chorus-girl career had ended before the Barbizon was built,
and it is hard to imagine Joan “the movie star” as a Barbizon
girl.
The Barbizon Hotel for Women flourished for close to forty
years, but toward the end of the 1960s, the sexual revolution as
well as a decline in the hotel’s physical plant caused it to lose
much of its former cachet. Nonetheless, it was still a beautiful
building—with its tapestry-brickwork facade, its gargoyles and
columned balconies—and after being restored in the 1980s, it
has flourished as a full-service hotel . . . for both sexes.
Visit www.melrosehote/newyork.com.

23.

MYRNA
425

East

LOY

APARTMENT

63rd

Street

Bubbly, witty, fast-talking Nora Charles of The Thin Man will go
down in film history as one of the movies’ most sophisticated New
York ladies. For several decades before her death in 1993, the great
star who created her on screen lived—appropriately—on the Upper
East Side. The surprise was that Myrna Loy was born way out west
(in Montana) and grew up in Southern California. A fierce activist,
Loy temporarily abandoned her film career during World War II to

180

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

a

LOVER’S

GUIDE

I

TIE

Class act: Myrna Loy
with William Powell in

The Thin Man, 1934

work full-time for the Red Cross. In her NYC years she was a U.S.
representative to UNESCO. She never won an Academy Award but
was given an honorary Oscar in 1991.
24.

BARBRA
1157

Third

STREISAND

APARTMENT

Avenue

Early on in her journey to superstardom—and along, long way
from Beverly Hills and Malibu, where she would eventually own
considerable property—Barbra Streisand lived in an apartment
above Oscar’s Salt of the Sea Restaurant. The year was 1962, she
was twenty-one, and this was the first apartment she’d ever had
on her own. The neighborhood wasn’t bad, but it seems that the
apartment reeked of fish from the restaurant downstairs, and
predictably, so did much of Streisand’s wardrobe. Fish or no fish,
Barbra eventually reeled in her I Can Get It for You Wholesale
leading man, Elliott Gould, who wound up sharing the Third
Avenue pad with the lady who would be his wife. Here the two
had romantic meals that they ate off of a sewing machine in the

Tie

UPie ERE

ASTp 'siliDiE= JBI VERILY

THINS)

(EAST

181

living room because, according to Mr. Gould, “a big rat named
Oscar lived in the kitchen.” Although Barbra didn’t seem to
mind her hovel, her managers Marty Erlichman and Marty Bregman did. And when they decided that their client needed a major makeover in order to prepare her for the big time that lay
ahead, one of their top priorities was to move Barbra and Elliott
to less odorific quarters.
Today, the fish restaurant is gone but the little walkup Streisand shared with Gould has somehow managed to survive amid
the massive co-ops and condos that have swallowed up much of
upper Third Avenue.
25.

MR.

AND

MRS.

RICKY

623

East

68th

Street

RICARDO

APARTMENT

He was a Cuban band leader, and she was the wackiest of wives.
Together they lived in apartment 3D of a Manhattan apartment
house managed by their neighbors and good friends, Fred and
Ethel Mertz. When the Ricardos had a son, Little Ricky, in 1953,

Leaving Manhattan: Lucy, Ricky, and the Mertzes pack up the Pontiac

182

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

the family moved to a larger apartment (3B) in the same building. Later, as was true of many Manhattan couples with young
children in the 1950s, the Ricardos abandoned the city and
headed for the suburbs. In their case, they settled in Greenwich,
Connecticut. The Mertzes followed them and became their good
neighbors in the country, just as they had been in the city. But by
1959 there were rumors that the real-life marriage behind the Ricardo TV marriage was on the rocks, and by 1960 I Love Lucy
was off the air. Television hasn’t been the same since.
P.S. The Ricardo apartment building is extremely hard to find.
In fact, it’s impossible to find, since the six hundred block of East
68th Street would probably be smack in the middle of the East
River! The best place, therefore, to check out the Manhattan
residence of Lucy, Ricky, Fred, and Ethel is on one of the many
reruns of their classic sitcom.
26.

DRESSED

TO

162

7Oth

East

KILL

OFFICE

Street

In Brian De Palma’s bloody little 1980 horror film, Dressed to
Kill, Michael Caine plays a mild-mannered Manhattan psychiatrist named Dr. Robert Elliot, who practices out of a posh office
in the basement of this Upper East Side brownstone. Despite the
fashionable address, movie lovers would do well to think twice
before going into therapy with Dr. Elliot. Ask Angie Dickinson.
27.

JOAN

CRAWFORD

2 East

7Oth

APARTMENT

Street

She was not just one of Hollywood’s greatest stars, she was one
of its toughest survivors. When she was dropped by MGM in
1943, Crawford quickly resurfaced at Warner Bros., with whom
she won an Oscar for her performance in Mildred Pierce in
1945. When her career was again on the downswing in the mid1950s, she made a brilliant move with her marriage to PepsiCola tycoon Al Steele. Indeed, for the first time in her life, she
had hitched up with a man who could support her, instead of the
other way around. With her new husband, Joan moved from
Los Angeles to New York and quickly set to finding an apartment that would befit a movie star married to a captain of indus-

AESOP

BREA

de SIDE aBiEV ERILY

FHIPLIES

EAST

183

try. Two East 70th Street was the chosen address, and here the
Steeles secured not one but two apartments which they then
turned into a massive duplex. Joan’s adopted daughter, Christina,
describes the flat in great detail in her now legendary look at her
mother’s life, Mommie Dearest (Morrow, 1978)—from the plastic flowers and plants to the plastic-covered furniture to the fact
that no one was allowed to wear shoes beyond the entrance hall
because “Mother didn’t want those white rugs soiled.”
Despite those plastic covers on the furniture, Joan and Al
lived lavishly on East 70th Street—but not wisely. The apartment
had cost close to $1 million to redo, which Steele had financed
by borrowing against his future salary at Pepsi-Cola. Thus, when
Steele died unexpectedly of a heart attack in 1959, Joan was left
with massive debts. Once again, her survivor’s instinct kicked in.
She not only moved to less grand quarters at 150 East 69th
Street, she turned her token membership on the board of directors of Pepsi-Cola into a lucrative full-time occupation. (Movie
lovers will remember the scene in the Pepsi boardroom from the

Joan with 1962
autobiography

NEW

184

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

film of Mommie Dearest in which Joan, played by Faye Dunaway, delivers the famous line: “Don’t fuck with me, fellas!”)
Joan also made a smart move in 1961, when director Robert
Aldrich approached her about doing a film version of a creepy
novel called What Ever Happened to Baby Jane? Seeing the potential box-office appeal of the vehicle, Crawford persuaded Aldrich
to cast her archrival Bette Davis in the title role. But whereas Bette
went for $60,000 up front plus 5 percent of the film’s profits,
crafty Crawford settled for a mere $30,000 salary against a whopping 15 percent of the gross. The film was a runaway hit, and Joan
wound up making over $1 million on the deal. This, coupled with
her Pepsi-Cola cash, set her up for the rest of her life.
28.

POLA
907

NEGRI
Fifth

APARTMENT

Avenue

Once a famous silent-screen star, Pola Negri was a Polish-born actress who came to Hollywood via her fame in German movies.
While her exotic on-screen persona sold tickets in the 1920s, she—
and her heavy Polish accent—didn’t survive the talkies, and she
spent most of the 1930s in Europe, until World War II broke out.
Pola Negri’s place in film history is sometimes traceable less to
her films than her being the self-proclaimed last lover of Rudolph
Valentino. Her “grief” at the time of Valentino’s death was legendary. Producer Walter Wanger supposedly said of Pola’s train
journey to the Valentino funeral that “she fainted all the way
from Hollywood to Kansas City and then laid down on the job—
but promised her press agent to come through with some really
big swoons in Chicago and carry it right through to Rudy’s bier
in New York.”
In the early 1940s, when Pola returned to the United States
after her European sojourn, people were talking about a romantic involvement that she was rumored to have had with another
famous personality—Adolf Hitler. Pola denied the allegations
but was never able to pick up her American acting career. In the
1950s, she resided in Manhattan at 907 Fifth Avenue. Neighbors
reported that a great portrait of Valentino hung in a prominent
place in her foyer. By the end of the decade, she had moved into
the San Antonio mansion of oil heiress Margaret West. When

TES

WIP Re AS i

S/DIET SBE -ERIDY

(FULIES

(EAST,

185

Miss West died in 1963, she willed Pola her jewelry and lifetime
use of her Texas house. When Pola died in 1987, she was still
living in Texas.
29.

MIDNIGHT
114

East

COWBOY
72nd

APARTMENT

Street

Movie lovers will remember how Sylvia Miles slipped John
Voight past the doorman of 114 East 72nd Street after she had
picked up the young Texan outside on the street in Midnight
Cowboy. At the time of their encounter Miss Miles was walking
her poodle and having a hard time getting the animal to “Do it
for Mama!” Miles received an Oscar nomination for her brief appearance as the trashy, over-the-hill East Side matron in the film;
Voight also got an Academy Award nomination for his work and
was judged best actor of 1969 by the New York Film Critics.
30.

BREAKFAST
171

East

71st

AT

TIFFANY’S

APARTMENT

Street

Supposedly it was a tiny apartment in the East 70s, but for those
who know New York, the enormous pad—complete with zebraskin rugs on the floor—that Paramount art directors designed for
Holly Golightly (Audrey Hepburn) in Truman Capote’s Breakfast at Tiffany’s could exist in only one place: on a Hollywood

Breakfast at

Tiffany's block

186

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

soundstage. When Breakfast at Tiffany’s came to New York City
to shoot exteriors, however, reality won out over fantasy, and a
real East 70s townhouse was chosen to represent Holly’s apartment building. Wedged between an identical (save for the striped
awnings) townhouse on the left and a distinctive stone building
with Gothic arches on the right, this backlot-beautiful location
looks much the same today as it did in 1961, when it was immortalized in Breakfast at Tiffany’s.
31.

GLORIA
920

Fifth

SWANSON

APARTMENT

Avenue

She was born in Chicago, made a name for herself in Hollywood,
and became a countess in France, but ultimately, for Gloria Swanson, New York was home. In fact, in the 1920s, when the bulk

of feature-film production was deserting the East Coast for California, Swanson went from West to East, and made some of her
major 1920s movies in New York City.

Straphanger Swanson: Manhandled, 1924
LT

I

EET)

RHESUP

PER

EAST

SIDE:

BEVERLEY

VHIELS

EAST

187

Actually, with the exception of her magnificent comeback as
aging silent-movie star Norma Desmond in Sunset Boulevard
(1950), Swanson virtually retired from the screen in 1934 and
was involved in a variety of New York City-based ventures
throughout the 1940s. These ranged from her own cosmetics
company to a business that backed inventors to starring in road
shows of Broadway plays. In 1948 Swanson broke new ground
in show business when she hosted one of the world’s first weekly
hourlong television talk shows. Broadcast by WPIX in New
York, this pioneering venture in TV programming featured a set
that duplicated Swanson’s Fifth Avenue apartment, and the format—a mix of celebrity interviews, public-service segments, and
cooking demonstrations—was not unlike many of the morning
shows that are now televised all across the country.
In 1970, at the age of seventy-two, Swanson had yet another
career triumph when she replaced Eileen Heckart in Butterflies Are Free on Broadway. During the run of the show the
indomitable Swanson drove herself to and from the theater in
her own little yellow Toyota. Home then, as it had been for
several decades in New York, was a spacious apartment at 920
Fifth Avenue. Married to her sixth husband, writer William
Dufty, Swanson was at the same New York address when she
died in 1981.
32.

CARRIE
245

East

BRADSHAW
73rd

RESIDENCE

Street

From 1998 to 2004, this was the official address of the columnist Carrie Bradshaw (Sarah Jessica Parker), who chronicled her
Manhattan adventures in the New York Star. Like many New
Yorkers, Carrie started off renting, but when the building went
co-op she purchased her flat. Thanks to HBO, millions of people
all over the world have followed Ms. Bradshaw’s life and loves

in the series Sex and the City. Although she has ostensibly lived
at the above address (which doesn’t exist) throughout most of
her seven-year stint on TV, five different locations have been used
to represent the exterior of her building.

188

33.

NEW

WOODY
930

YORK:

ALLEN

Fifth

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

APARTMENT

Avenue

A one-man film industry, Woody Allen produces, directs, writes,
and usually stars in movies that, more likely than not, are set in

New York City. Prolific (he comes out with about a film a year),
and acclaimed even by the Hollywood establishment (witness
Annie Hall’s and Hannah and Her Sisters’ Oscars), Allen reportedly likes to work in New York because he feels “serene in the
knowledge that, if I want to, I can always go home and get a
sweater.” From 1969 to the 1990s, Woody kept his woolies in a
large duplex apartment at 930 Fifth Avenue. He currently lives
with his wife, Soon-Yi Previn, the adopted daughter of Allen’s
former partner Mia Farrow (with whom he has two adopted
children and one biological child), in a large townhouse alittle

farther uptown.
34.

SHERMAN

McCOY

800

Avenue

Park

APARTMENT

It was one of the great literary successes of the 1980s—Tom
Wolfe’s scathing look at greed and social inequity in modern-day
Manhattan in The Bonfire of the Vanities. But the 1990 movie
version of the Wolfe super-seller was one of that decade’s biggest
bombs, grossing barely $16 million of its $47 million budget. In
fact, the Brian De Palma-directed film was such a disaster the
whole debacle was chronicled in author Julie Salamon’s book
The Devil’s Candy (Houghton Mifflin, 1991). In the film the protagonist Sherman McCoy (Tom Hanks) and his wife Judy (Kim
Cattrall in her brunette, pre-Sex and the City days) lived in this
posh Park Avenue building at 78th Street.
35.

CARLYLE
35

East

HOTEL
76th

Street

One of Manhattan’s chicest and most discreet hotels, the Carlyle
has catered to the rich and famous for decades. Among its regulars have been Elizabeth Taylor, Robert Evans, Steve Martin, Paul
Newman and Joanne Woodward, and Warren Beatty (who is said

ee

UPI PERE EvACS:Ts SiiDie

EBiEVWVERIEY

tae S: EA Si

189

to have been a lousy tipper). In the early 1960s, the Carlyle was
where President John FE. Kennedy liked to stay, and it is reported
that Marilyn Monroe was a frequent, often incognito, visitor to
his suite when Mrs. Kennedy was not accompanying him.
Besides its elegant rooms, suites, and cooperative apartments,

the Carlyle is also known for the glittering Cafe Carlyle, where
Bobby Short sings sophisticated songs. It was here that Woody
Allen had a less-than-satisfying date with Dianne Wiest in Hannah and Her Sisters (1986) and wound up uttering the ultimate

put-down: “You don’t deserve Cole Porter!”
In 2002, Allen returned to the Carlyle to shoot a scene for
Hollywood Ending. Before that, the hotel doubled as the European hostelry where heiress Glenn Close meets her future husband, Jeremy Irons, in Reversal of Fortune (1990). The hotel was
also the site of the lavish penthouse where media mogul
Anthony Hopkins lived in Meet Joe Black (1998) and where
Brad Pitt, as Death, pays him an unwelcome visit.
Visit www.thecarlyle.com.

36.

VERA
991

WANG

BRIDAL

Madison

Avenue

SALON

A former fashion assistant at Vogue magazine, Vera Wang has
become the most successful creator of wedding gowns in the
world. Although she has branched out into couture for other
occasions—such as the Academy Awards ceremonies—Wang
is still the star designer on the celebrity and socialite nuptials
circuit. In 2003, during the off-again, on-again, off-again, etc.
engagement of Jennifer Lopez and Ben Affleck, Wang was commissioned by J. Lo to run upalittle $20,000 number for what
was then expected to be the wedding of the year. But then, since
Wang would get so much publicity from the Bennifer event, the
star wangled a freebie dress. When J. Lo canceled the big wedding in favor of a smaller affair and then when the whole thing
was called off, Wang got a lot of publicity, but not the kind she
expected. Wang kept to an official “no comment” regarding the
dresscapade—but insiders say we shouldn’t expect to see Lopez
wearing Wang at any upcoming awards ceremonies.

190

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

The story continued when the notoriously penny-pinching
actor Kevin Costner tried to talk Wang into letting his fiancée
Christine Baumgartner wear the dress for free at their upcoming
wedding in exchange for publicity. Wang supposedly said she’d
give them the dress if they paid her $5,000 for alterations. Costner agreed, but Baumgartner reportedly balked at the idea of getting married in J.Lo’s cast-off frock. Meanwhile one thing is
certain: Ms. Wang has certainly gotten her fair share of publicity.
37. SIX

DEGREES

860

Fifth

OF

SEPARATION

APARTMENT

Avenue

They were the perfect Upper East Side couple. He was the wellknown art dealer J. Flanders Kittridge and his wife, Ouisa, was
attractive, witty, and frequently very useful in schmoozing with
the prospective buyers of Flan’s multimillion-dollar paintings.

When actor Sidney Poitier’s son Paul, a friend of the Kittridge
kids at Harvard, winds up on their doorstep one evening in need
of a place to stay, Flan and Ouisa at first think it’s a hoot—not
to mention wonderful dinner-table conversation. When it turns
out that Paul is actually a con man, they still dine out on the
experience, but Ouisa, ultimately, is profoundly moved and
changed to discover the “six degrees of separation” that bind all
human beings together. The Fifth Avenue apartment of Flan
(Donald Sutherland) and Ouisa (Stockard Channing) where the
faux Poitier (Will Smith) shatters their serenity in the 1993 film
version of John Guare’s play Six Degrees of Separation was here
at 860 Fifth, although for most of the interiors another building—1049 Fifth Avenue—was used. Guare’s story was based on
a real event, and the playwright was unsuccessfully sued by the
young man who claimed Guare had stolen his story.
38.

METROPOLITAN
Fifth

Avenue

MUSEUM

at 81st

OF

ART

Street

It was one of the greatest, longest, and kinkiest seduction scenes

ever: Angie Dickinson in the Metropolitan Museum of Art playing cat and mouse with a mysterious man in dark glasses. After
many minutes of cruising among the Impressionists and Post-

RES

U PP EIRMEASis SiDiEs IB ViEIRIEY tH WEES: JE A'S7,

191

Impressionists, the two finally make more than eye contact. The
film is Dressed to Kill (1980), Brian De Palma’s homage to
Hitchcock, and for those who haven’t seen it, we won’t divulge

what happens. What we will divulge is that while the famous
Dressed to Kill seduction scene seems to take place in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the truth of the matter is that the museum would allow De Palma to do only exteriors on its property.
For the interiors, therefore, the director had to head down to his
hometown—Philadelphia—where the Museum of Fine Arts, that
columned Greek temple that looked so sensational in the original Rocky, opened its doors and its galleries to the Dressed to
Kill crew.
In 1966, the Philadelphia Museum of Fine Arts did the same
thing for a long sequence in Barbra Streisand’s television special
Color Me Barbra. Again, the Met had been the producers’ first
choice for a location, but again the institution refused to allow a
film crew—even Barbra Streisand’s—to shoot among its treasures. Indeed, if you’re a film crew, it’s never been easy to get in-

Sonnanstine
The Met according to MGM:

Robert Walker and Judy Garland at the

Egyptian galleries in The Clock, 1945
pe

a

a

AEE

TEESES

LDL

(hy

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

side the Met. In the quirky 1990 film All the Vermeers in New
York, the exterior of the museum was used but the galleries are
those of the nearby Whitney—and the Vermeers, needless to say,
are copies. For the 1999 remake of The Thomas Crown Affair,
the Met would hear nothing of a major art heist being shot on
its premises, so the interiors were done some forty blocks down
Fifth Avenue at the New York Public Library. For Woody Allen’s
Everyone Says I Love You (1996), the Met posed no problem,
since the scene where Edward Norton and Drew Barrymore
break out in song takes place at the fountain in front of the museum. On the other hand, back in 1944, when Vincente Minnelli
wanted to stage a sequence in the Met’s Egyptian galleries for
The Clock, which starred his wife, Judy Garland, and Robert
Walker, all the director needed to do was to make his wishes
known to MGM’s art department, and, voila, the Met was recreated for Minnelli on a soundstage. And while those exteriors
of the Metropolitan in The Clock are authentic, Judy and Bob
never had to set foot out of Culver City to appear to be on the
steps of the great New York museum. It was all done through the
magic of the “process shot,” i.e., rear projection.
These days, however, the Met does permit filming within one
wing of its property: the dramatic, glassed-in Temple of Dendur
pavilion, a vast space that houses a restored Egyptian Temple
surrounded by fountains. Frequently rented out for major-league
receptions and parties in New York (and a major moneymaker
for the museum), Dendur has also provided the setting for
gala sequences in many Manhattan movies. Among them: Six
Degrees of Separation (1993), Changing Lanes (2002), Maid in
Manhattan (2003), and A Perfect Murder (1998). In this last
film, which starred Gwyneth Paltrow and Michael Douglas and
which used hundreds of extras for the Dendur do, some of the
Screen Actors Guild extras were angered and complained to their
union when a few of Douglas’s friends, whom he had invited to
take part in the shoot, were placed closer to the camera than the
SAG actors. The Temple of Dendur was also used as background
in a walking-and-talking shot with Meg Ryan and Billy Crystal
in When Harry Met Sally (1989).
Visit www.metmuseum.org.

ieee

39.

RiRMEAS le SIDES

STANHOPE
995

Fifth

ie Vib REA SH IEES

EAS Ti

193

HOTEL
Avenue

It was at this classy Upper East Side hotel that Carrie Bradshaw (Sarah Jessica Parker) stayed when her handyman-of-themoment Aidan Shaw (John Corbett) was redoing the floors of
her nearby apartment in Sex and the City. To mark the visit,
the Stanhope now features a Sex and the City cocktail, a
Cosmopolitan-like concoction of cranberry juice, vodka, and
Alizé Red Passion.

Both Parker and Anne Heche, who played a lawyer staying at
the Stanhope in Return to Paradise (1998), were model Stanhope
guests. The same cannot be said of the bad-boy actor played
by Leonardo DiCaprio in Woody Allen’s Celebrity (1998), who
trashes his Stanhope room. (Shades of Johnny Depp, who in
1994 trashed his $2,200-a-night presidential suite at the Stanhope’s neighboring Mark Hotel. Though he offered to pay for
the damages, the young star was forcibly ejected from the premises and his accommodation for the night was subsequently pro-

vided by the City of New York. Indeed, he was taken to three
different jail cells that night—and was overwhelmed by female
cops at each location.) Meanwhile, the Stanhope can also be
seen in Igby Goes Down (2002), when the misunderstood Igby
(Kieran Culkin) interrupts his mom’s, Susan Sarandon’s, lunch in

the hotel’s dining room, which has a stunning view of the Metropolitan Museum.
Visit www.stanhopepark.hyatt.com.

40.

FRANK
1076

E. CAMPBELL

Madison

FUNERAL

HOME

Avenue

The setting for the final production number in the careers of
many a superstar, the Frank E. Campbell funeral home has been
in the business of stylish send-offs since the 1890s. Constantly in
the news when it hosted Rudolph Valentino’s last rites in 1926,
Campbell’s was then on the West Side of Manhattan at Broadway and 66th Street. In its present East Side location since 1937,
Campbell’s has buried, from its Madison Avenue chapel, such

194

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

celebrities as Tommy Dorsey, Gertrude Lawrence, Ezio Pinza,
John Garfield, Montgomery Clift, Judy Holliday, Joan Crawford, James Cagney, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, Douglas Fairbanks Jr., rapper Christopher Wallace (Notorious B.I.G.), and
Cuban superstar singer Celia Cruz, whose street-mobbed funeral
rivaled Valentino’s. (Movie lovers may also remember Campbell’s as the bizarre setting for the “Enjoy yourself, it’s later than
you think” production number in Woody Allen’s 1996 urban
musical Everyone Says I Love You.)
The funeral to end all funerals was the production Campbell’s
staged for Judy Garland’s final farewell appearance in June 1969.
Some 22,000 faithful fans, many of whom had lined up at the
funeral home even before the plane bearing her body from London had touched down at John F. Kennedy Airport, filed past
Judy’s glass-topped, blue-velvet-lined casket for over twenty-four
hours. Many carried portable record and tape players that
echoed Garland’s greatest hits as they waited to see their idol one
last time.
Since Judy’s husband, Mickey Deans, the thirty-three-year-old
former manager of New York’s trendy Arthur discothéque, was
reportedly too distraught to deal with the historic circumstances
that enveloped him, Judy’s daughter Liza Minnelli handled most
of the funeral arrangements, with the help of her godmother,
entertainer Kay Thompson. Wanting to keep everything upbeat,
Liza insisted that Campbeli’s be decorated with yellow (Judy’s favorite color) and white flowers, and ordered everyone invited to
the private funeral service to wear “anything but black.” There
were, of course, problems. Makeup, for one. It seems that Judy
had requested in her will that Gene Hills, her old MGM makeup
man, do her final face. Hills, however, was in charge of Eva Gabor’s makeup for the TV series Green Acres, and Eva refused to
let him off the show. Then there was the problem of the color of
the casket. Liza wanted it white but Campbell’s didn’t have a
white one readily available. To the rescue came Kay Thompson,
who suggested spray-painting the mahogany number that the funeral parlor had come up with.
The trickiest point of all had to do with cremation. Judy had
requested it, and Liza wanted to adhere to her mother’s wishes.
But Judy’s ex-husband Sid Luft, and their two children, Lorna

Tigi

PIPER

EAS Te SDE: GBEV BIRIEN YA EIS:

BAST

195

and Joey, were against it. In the end, the Lufts prevailed. Sid Luft
also felt that Judy should be buried in Hollywood, but on this
point it was Liza who won out and saw to it that her mother
was laid to rest on the East Coast at Ferncliff Cemetery in New
York’s Westchester County. According to Liza, Judy loathed Hollywood.
The service itself brought out Mickey Rooney, Ray Bolger,
Lauren Bacall, Jack Benny, Cary Grant, Katharine Hepburn,
Burt Lancaster, Dean Martin, Lana Turner, Freddie Bartholo-

mew, Otto Preminger, and comedian Alan King. King, who had
warmed up audiences for Judy’s triumphant run at the Palace
Theater back in 1951, reportedly joked to Liza at the beginning
of the service, “This is the first time that your mom was ever on
time for a performance.” The rites were officiated by the same
Catholic priest who had married Judy and Mickey Deans (her
fifth husband) in London six months earlier. The hightlight of the
ceremony, however, was the eulogy delivered by Judy’s A Star Is
Born costar, James Mason. (Mickey Rooney was considered for
this role, but it was felt that he was too upset by Judy’s passing to
handle the assignment.) The final touching moment was when the
whole congregation sang The Battle Hymn of the Republic—the
song that Judy had sung on her TV show in November 1963
when the whole nation was mourning the untimely death of President John F. Kennedy. And then, amid both laughter and tears, it
was over. There was no applause, however, and no calls for more.
This time Judy was not coming back for an encore.
Visit www.frankecampbell.com.

41.

MARLENE

DIETRICH

993

Avenue

Park

APARTMENT

For close to three decades, Marlene kept, and often resided in, a
four-room apartment in this serious thirteen-story Park Avenue
building at 84th Street across from St. Ignatius Loyola Church.

Among her many treasures here was a photo of her great friend
Ernest Hemingway, which sat for years on a Sheraton table in
her living room and bore the inscription: “To Marlene, if she still
loves me or if she doesn’t—Papa.” Dietrich also had amassed an

196

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Dietrich at legendary
nightclub El Morocco
with French actor
Jean Gabin

impressive art collection that was displayed throughout her
apartment and included paintings by Chagall, Cézanne, Corot,
Delacroix, Picasso, and Utrillo.
A hausfrau at heart, the ultraglamorous Marlene was frequently known to get down on her hands and knees with a wash
bucket and scrub her own floors. She was also known to play
telephone tricks, and often screened phone calls by pretending
to be the maid. Sometimes the maid charade went even further.
New York actor and die-hard Dietrich fan Martin J. Walsh
recalls the time in the early 1970s that he gained admittance to
993 Park to deliver a bouquet for her birthday. After ringing the
legendary lady’s doorbell (apartment 12E), Walsh was told by a
high-pitched voice that “Miss Deetrish” was not in. When Walsh
announced his gift, the door was cracked open, a famous arm
appeared and snatched the posies, and the door was closed
again.

In the mid-1970s, Marlene, after a series of disastrous onstage accidents, moved permanently to a posh but small apartment at 12 avenue Montaigne in Paris, where her “maid”

Te

EU
IPEARSAEsACS Ty SHES GREW

IRIE Y

SAIS:

EAVS Ty

NOT

continued to screen all calls. Dietrich’s last on-screen appearance
was in Just a Gigolo (1979), which starred David Bowie and featured Marlene as the proprietor of a ballroom where German war
widows paid to dance with young gentlemen. After that, she lived
as a virtual recluse in her Paris apartment, which Maximilian
Schell re-created in a film studio for his Academy Award-winning
documentary on Dietrich’s life and career, Marlene (1985). Die-

trich, who remained the master of her image right up to the end,
speaks throughout the film, but refused to allow Schell to photograph her or her apartment for the project.
Dietrich died in Paris in 1992 at the age of ninety-one. She is
buried in her native Berlin.
42.

BUTTERFIELD
1050

Fifth

8 APARTMENT

Avenue

Elizabeth Taylor won her first Oscar for her role as a high-class
call girl in the 1960 film Butterfield 8. While her acting is dodgy
at best, Taylor deserved an Academy Award for the opening se-

y
Cozy at El Morocco: Butterfield 8 buddies Eddie Fisher and Elizabeth
Taylor, ca. 1961

NEW

198

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

quence of the film in which she wakes up alone in the very married Laurence Harvey’s flashy New York apartment. For a good
ten minutes, we are treated to Liz primping, smoking, putting on
her makeup, and eventually coming across the $250 Harvey has
left her along with the note “Is that enough?” Furious, Liz leaves
the money and writes a reply on the mirror in lipstick: “No
sale!” But before she storms out, she nicks a nifty little mink
from the closet of Harvey’s absent wife (Dina Merrill). The Harvey apartment building was called the Sandringham in the film
and its address was given as 1038 Fifth Avenue, although the real
building is on the northeast corner of 86th Street at number
1050.
As bad as Liz is in most of the film, the worst-acting award in
this soap opera should go to Eddie Fisher, in the role of Liz’s
best friend Steve. It was a bit of nepotistic casting, since Taylor
had recently married Fisher, having stolen him from Debbie
Reynolds. Butterfield 8, based on a John O’Hara novel, could
also win a worst-dialogue award; at one point Liz, whose character is named Gloria Wandrous, introduces herself as “Gloria—
as in Sic Transit.”
43.

RANSOM
1067

APARTMENT

Fifth

Avenue

Superwealthy airline executive Tom Mullen (Mel Gibson) and
his beautiful wife, Kate (René Russo), live an enviable upperclass life in this Upper East Side building just steps from the
Guggenheim Museum—until their young son is kidnapped and
held for $2 million ransom. When the initial drop is botched and
the kidnappers subsequently up the ante, Type-A Gibson decides
to go after the criminals himself in the 1996 Ron Howard thriller
Ransom. Gibson and Russo’s posh Manhattan pad overlooked
the Central Park Reservoir, which is now named for its most famous jogger, the late Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, who lived a
few blocks away at 1040 Fifth Avenue. Meanwhile, Ransom was
based on the 1956 Glenn Ford film Death Wish—not to be confused with the five Charles Bronson thrillers that co-opted that
same title from 1974 to 1994.

PES

44.

OPI

ERMEAS

Ty SiliDE “BEV EREY

HIMES

SOLOMON

R. GUGGENHEIM

MUSEUM

1071

Avenue

Fifth

EAST

199

Frank Lloyd Wright’s 1959 museum is one of New York City’s
most spectacular architectural wonders. A seemingly endless
gallery that spirals up or down—depending on how you visit it—
around a great round atrium, the space is a delight to experience,
even if the art is sometimes less than stellar. For filmmakers, the
Guggenheim is too good to be true. Woody Allen first featured it
in Manhattan (1979), as the trendy Manhattan museum where he
first meets Diane Keaton. Allen then returned to the Guggenheim
for Everyone Says I Love You (1996) and Small Time Crooks
(2000). Although Alfred Hitchcock never used the Frank Lloyd
Wright landmark, it has had its Hitchcockian moments—notably
in director Ridley Scott’s stylish 1987 thriller Someone to Watch
over Me, where a thug who has threatened Mimi Rogers in the
ladies’ room is pursued round the curlicue museum by detective
Tom Berenger. More fantastic is the sequence in Men in Black
(1997), where Will Smith chases an alien, disguised as a human,

bs
Bafa
BS).
D

we
Dog
Pa

Ca
ls

Frank Lloyd Wright wonder: Solomon

R. Guggenheim

Museum

200

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

who climbs up the exterior wall of the museum. Smith races up
the ramp to see the human/alien fall off the roof onto Fifth Avenue. The Guggenheim also turns up in She-Devil (1989), as the
glamorous spot where successful romance novelist Meryl Streep
first meets frumpy Roseanne Barr Arnold and sets her sights on
Roseanne’s dapper husband, Ed Begley Jr. Messing with
Roseanne turns out not to be a good idea, however. When first
asked what attracted her to her unsympathetic role in the film,
Streep replied, “I’ve always wanted to be a glamour-puss.”
Visit www.guggenheim.org.

45.

CHURCH
2 East

OF
90th

THE

HEAVENLY

REST

Street

This austere Gothic church on upper Fifth Avenue will be of interest to movie lovers since it is here where the ashes of the great

SS

Church of the
Heavenly Rest

RH

ESCUPPEIRMEASTE SUD'E:

BEVEREY

YHILES

EAST

201

film star Gloria Swanson, who lived twenty blocks down Fifth
Avenue, are interred. Swanson was born in Chicago in 1897 of
Swedish-Italian parents and died in Manhattan in 1983.
Visit www. heavenlyrest.org.

46.

CARNEGIE

MANSION

2 East

Street

91st

A survivor from the days when Fifth Avenue was noted for its
grand private homes rather than its imposing apartment buildings, the sixty-four-room Carnegie Mansion was built in 1898
by industrialist Andrew Carnegie. Home to Carnegie’s widow
until her death in 1946, the place was later used by Columbia
University, and today is the headquarters of the Cooper-Hewitt
National Design Museum, which focuses on architectural, decorative, and industrial design. Movie lovers may recall the elegant Georgian building from its many roles in features as well
as in made-for-television films and miniseries: Daddy Long Legs
(1955),

as playboy

Fred Astaire’s

mansion;

Carnegie Mansion
a

RT

BD

Marathon

Man

NEW

202

YORK:

THE

LOVER’S

MOVIE

GUIDE

(1976), as the Russian embassy; The Next Man (1976), as the
Saudi Arabian embassy; Arthur (1981), as Dudley Moore’s grandmother’s home; The Two Mrs. Grenvilles (1986), as the Grenville
mansion; and Working Girl (1988), as the site of the Trask wed-

ding, which Harrison Ford and Melanie Griffith crash. The location has also appeared in The Anderson

Tapes (1972), God-

spell (1973), Jumpin’ Jack Flash (1986), 84 Charing Cross Road
(1986), Sidney Sheldon’s Master of the Game (1987), and Judith
Krantz’s I’ll Take Manhattan (1987).
Visit htto.//ndm.si.edu.

47.

CONVENT

OF

1 East

Street

91st

THE

SACRED

HEART

Like the Carnegie Mansion (now the Cooper-Hewitt National
Design Museum) across the street, this great Fifth Avenue palazzo was originally built for a millionaire. In this case, the man
was New York banker and patron of the arts Otto Khan, who
moved into what was one of the largest private homes ever built
in Manhattan—complete with dramatic arched carriageway—in
1918. Today, besides being the site of a Catholic girls school, the
grand mansion is often used as a film location. One of the most
interesting of its appearances was for the Trask wedding sequence in Working Girl (1988), in which the Kahn/Convent

property provided the interiors while the neighboring Carnegie
Mansion/Design Museum was used for the exteriors. On its
own, the Convent of the Sacred Heart can be seen in The Anderson Tapes (1972), where it was the object of Sean Connery’s
criminal intentions, and in A Perfect Murder (1998), as the lav-

ish digs shared by Gwyneth Paltrow and Michael Douglas.
Visit www.cshnyc.org.

48.

THE HOUSE ON 92ND
53 East 93rd Street

STREET

HOUSE

Elsa Gowns was the name of Elsa Gebhardt’s dress shop on the
north side of 92nd Street, near the corner of Madison Avenue, in
Twentieth Century—Fox’s landmark 1945 spy thriller, The House

Phe

WPiP BR

YEAS

TySiDiE?

BBV EIRILY

ee

=

VHS:

EAST.

203

a

Leo G. Carroll and Signe Hasso in The House on 92nd Street, 1945
SS

TT

AE

SS

EESN

SO Ee

ES EE]

on 92nd Street. In this riveting, action-packed tale of Nazi agents
operating in New York City during World War II, Elsa Gowns is
actually a front for the Fifth Column. Based on an actual FBI
case and shot entirely on location, The House on 92nd Street
told its dramatic story in a realistic, documentary way, a style
that the film’s producer, Louis de Rochemont, had perfected as
creator of the March of Time newsreel series. Writing in the New
York Times, film critic Bosley Crowther said at the time that The

House on 92nd Street proved that “realism can be entertaining,
too.” Of course, even in the most realistic of films, there’s always
a trick or two, and in The House on 92nd Street, one of the
tricks was that the house used in the film was actually on 93rd
Street! Today, the famous movie mansion no longer stands, although its identical twin—the Alamo Apartments next door at

55 East 93rd—is often mistaken for it.
49.

MARX
179

BROTHERS

East

93rd

HOME

Street

Early in the twentieth century, a stage mother named Minna
Schoenberg Marx raised five sons at this address and saw to it that

204

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

they all entered show business at early ages. Originally named Milton, Leonard, Adolph, Julius Henry, and Herbert, Minnie’s boys
became much better known as Gummo, Chico, Harpo, Groucho,
and Zeppo Marx. Their father, a tailor in the same Yorkville neighborhood, kept the guys nattily attired for auditions.
50.

THE

CORNER

BOOKSTORE

1313

Madison

Avenue

This charming bookshop—with a big children’s section—at the
corner of 93rd Street and Madison has long been a neighborhood favorite. In 1987, one of its regulars was Anne Bancroft,
who starred as Helene Hanff in 84 Charing Cross Road as a
book lover who ultimately had to turn to London to find the
books she needed to fuel her passion. The film documented
Hanff’s odd long-distance romance with a bookstore on the
other side of the pond. Since the film was set in the 1950s, Madison Avenue had to be temporarily turned back to two-way traffic
to make the New York scenes authentic.
51.

ELAINE’S
1703

Second

Avenue

Welcome to Manhattan’s ultimate celebrity hangout, an unprepossessing Second Avenue bar/restaurant that owes its superstardom to its owner/overseer Elaine Kaufman, a woman who

knows how to make the famous feel like family and how to make
a lot of other people (especially if they don’t happen to have a
reservation) feel as though maybe they had better try somewhere
else for dinner. Among Elaine’s regulars are Gwyneth Paltrow,
Ben Affleck, Jennifer Lopez, Matt Damon, Salma Hayek, Chloé

Sevigny, Al Pacino, Shirley MacLaine, Warren Beatty, Mike
Nichols, Diana Ross, Milos Forman, Diane Keaton, Chevy Chase,
Sidney Lumet—to name a few stars of the movie crowd. For the
last decade, too, the restaurant has also been the site of Entertainment Weekly’s East Coast answer to Vanity Fair’s Hollywood
Academy Awards night party.
Elaine’s most famous table—off to the side of the busy passageway that links the restaurant’s very fashionable front room

Toes

UPPER

VAS

SliDie

BEV

EIR

VRIES

EAS Ti

205

The Celebrity (1998) set at Elaine’s: Hank Azaria, Kenneth Branagh,
Famke Janssen, Winona

Ryder

SS
a

ES FER

EE ROE EE

with a back dining room known as Siberia—belongs to Woody
Allen. An unwritten house rule: No one—not even the biggest
celebrity in the place—approaches the famous New York filmmaker’s table when he’s occupying it. Ever.
Woody Allen not only hangs out in Elaine’s, he’s always using it as a location. In Manhattan (1979), Elaine’s is the trendy
venue of the film’s opening scene; in Manhattan Murder Mystery
(1993), Diane Keaton espouses her theory that her next-door

neighbor has murdered his wife at a clubby little supper with
Woody Allen, Alan Alda, and Ron Rifkin; and in Allen’s starpacked (Kenneth Branagh, Judy Davis, Winona Ryder, Melanie
Griffith, Charlize Theron, Leonardo DiCaprio) look at Celebrity
(1999), sooner or later everyone winds up at Elaine’s.
Another Elaine’s regular, director Sidney Lumet, has also immortalized the place on-screen, although only insiders will recognize it as the bustling Manhattan bistro where TV execs Faye
Dunaway and William Holden find love among the Nielsen
ratings in Network (1976). Meanwhile, for movie lovers who
think they might like to have dinner at Elaine’s sometime, her

phone number is 212-534-8103. Good luck—and if you get in,
stay away from Woody!

NEW

206

52.

GRACIE
East

YORK:

THE

MANSION/CARL

End

Avenue

at

East

MOVIE

LOVER’S

SCHURZ

PARK

88th

GUIDE

Street

Built in 1799, this columned clapboard Federal house has been
the official residence of New York City’s mayors since 1942—
although the city’s current mayor, billionaire Michael Bloomberg, usually spends the night at his posh townhouse on East
79th Street. Over the years, Gracie Mansion has appeared in
many films—always as itself. In The Taking of Pelham One Two
Three (1973), mayor Lee Wallace, sick with the flu, has to deal
with the hijacking of a subway train from his Gracie Mansion
bed; in Ghostbusters II (1989), the boys visit mayor David Mar-

gulies with the bad news of another kind of subterranean nightmare threatening the city; and in 1996, Al Pacino is now mayor

of New York and John Cusack is his deputy and they both have
to deal with big trouble at and in City Hall, which featured sev-

eral Gracie Mansion sequences.
Movie lovers visiting Gracie Mansion will also want to take a
stroll in beautiful Carl Schurz Park, which is built over a hidden
section of the FDR Drive below. The park has been used by

Barry Pepper, Philio Seymour Hoffman, and Edward Norton in Carl
Schurz Park for 25th Hour, 2002
a

EE

ES

EES

ES

SETTERS

SESE

Teta en) ake aS

ANYSoli ry)

eae)

AVA dEGte nV Rte eco EAN;
©:

207

Woody Allen in Everyone Says I Love You (1995) and by Joan
Chen in Autumn in New York (2000)—but it is especially photogenic in Spike Lee’s 25th Hour (2002), as the place where Edward Norton rescues a bloody wounded dog, frequently walks
the same dog here, and finally gets his buddies to rough up his
pretty-boy looks before he goes to jail. The beauty of the park
with its gardens and Gothic tunnel provides a striking contrast
to the violence and blood of the first and final scenes.
Visit www.nyc.gov/html/om/html/gracie.html.

First Avenue

Second Avenue ~~

Third Avenue

Lexington Avenue,

- Ss

Irving Place

Park Avenue South

2

‘Ma ison enue

Se

“Fifth Avenue

Square
Union

WN
N

gs

=
Avenue of the Americas —
SNR

~
SAaRHSHA

KSLSRBRHREE

B

Seventh Avenue

—

=r)

1

Eighth Avenue

Ninth Avenue

Greenwich
Village

Tenth Avenue ee

~~Eleventh Avenue

Chelsea
Piers
Ward
Jefirey
2004
©L.
