Lower Manhattan/Staten Island:
Old New York

The tip of Manhattan Island is the original New York—dating
back to the days when the city was a small Dutch enclave called
New Amsterdam. Although virtually nothing remains of the
city’s early-seventeenth-century beginnings, this part of New
York at times has a distinct Old World feel, with its narrow
streets and serious government buildings and financial institutions. Indeed, since it contains some of the city’s oldest and most
august landmarks, Lower Manhattan is of interest both to movie
lovers and moviemakers. Ranging from Federal Hall to the New
York Stock Exchange to the great lady of New York Harbor—
the Statue of Liberty—many of these hallowed monuments are
symbolic not just of the City of New York but of the United
States of America, and over the years they have played major
roles on-screen, often providing ironic counterpoint to the mood
or message of the scenes in which they appear.
The city’s financial heart, Lower Manhattan also abounds in
modern commercial architecture, which is all part of the area’s
t
distinctive photographic potential. Sadly, two of its greates
t
presen
modern landmarks are no longer here, but they are still
11
in spirit and on film—and whenever they appear in a pre-9/
film, as they often do, they bring up powerful emotions.

=
=
>
Ss
Ss

BowingGreen-“
BD
Ss
LS

Battery Park
‘sfo Staten Island

to Statue of Liberty (14).

‘

© 2004 Jeffrey L. Ward

de

Bayonne Bridge

T am

New Jersey

7”

;

oo

~_/St. George

eae

Snug Harbor

oo
(emia

Fs

u fe

ba

. YF

Brooklyn

saepig 9 Voazan Brig
18

S

Atlantic Ocean

N
A

LOWER

MANHATTAN/STATEN

ISLAND:

OLD

NEW

YORK

299

This chapter also heads across New York Harbor to that terra
incognita (for most Manhattanites) called Staten Island. The bor-

ough’s relative obscurity, however, has proven to be its major
attraction for movie location managers, who have found that
Staten Island can be a convenient and surprisingly authenticlooking stand-in for other parts of the country—from the Midwest to New England—in New York—made films.
1. GROUND
1 and

ZERO

2 World

Trade

Plaza

Completed in 1970 and 1977, respectively, the two identical
110-story towers of the World Trade Center, at 1,350 feet each,
were New York City’s tallest buildings. Because of their paramount role in the city’s late-twentieth-century skyline, they
popped up in many made-in-NYC motion pictures during their

brief lifetime. Often used to represent the ultimate New York
City office building, the World Trade Center was where Cliff
Robertson appeared to be an ordinary business executive in

UE

eee

ay

Nyne
.
Abin
a)
3 rienfy ULut
ItsTireSa

aie eiy)

King Kong at the World Trade Center, 1976
ee

300

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Three Days of the Condor (1973), although he was really a CIA
baddie. It was also at the World Trade Center that Jane Fonda
headed up her murdered husband’s international monetary firm
in Rollover (1982), and where Eddie Murphy and Dan Aykroyd
wreaked financial ruin on the cavalier businessmen who had
switched their identities in Trading Places (1983).
Some of the most interesting uses of the World Trade Center

as a location were in fantasy films. In both Godspell (1973) and
The Wiz (1978), for example, the Center’s four-acre plaza provided an open-air soundstage for musical production numbers.
In Escape from New York (1981), the rooftop of one of the towers became a tarmac where Kurt Russell landed a plane in this
bizarre sci-fi film that portrayed the island of Manhattan as a
maximum-security prison of the 1990s. And then, of course,
there was King Kong, Dino De Laurentiis’s monumental 1976
remake of RKO’s 1933 classic ape-loses-girl love story, in which
the then upstart World Trade Center won out over the triedand-true Empire State Building for the film’s star skyscraper
role. Supposedly, however, Paramount’s negotiations with the
New York and New Jersey Port Authority, which owned and
managed the World Trade Center, proved difficult, and there
were moments when it looked as if the Empire State Building
would get the part after all. Meanwhile, the Empire State Building was quite annoyed at being overlooked by the new King
Kong, and its owners registered their ire by stationing men
dressed as apes carrying picket signs atop the observation tower.
Unlike the original King Kong, which was done entirely in
Hollywood withalittle help from some New York process shots,
De Laurentiis decided to go on location for his film’s New York
sequences. In addition to the dramatic production values, filming
in New York promised to provide lots of publicity for a picture
that was already running way over budget. The publicity began
with the Hollywood-to-New York journey of the forty-foot
Kong model. This involved dismantling the monster into ten
pieces, which were then shipped in special vans with “King
Kong” painted on them in huge letters. Press releases kept the
country informed of Kong’s progress.
For the actual shoot, the producers wanted five thousand extras.
To fill this large order, the production company “invited” the pub-

LOWER

MANHATTAN/STATEN

ISLAND:

OLD

NEW

YORK

301

lic to the World Trade Center Plaza on the nights of June 21, 22,
and 23, 1976, to take part in the excitement of moviemaking.
Thousands of New Yorkers showed up and, despite brawls, trouble with the Port Authority over security, and threats of rain, King
Kong got its crowd scenes—and its headlines. Indeed, for three
days the great ape was the city’s brightest star. Almost lost in all the
excitement was the blond model who was making her film debut in
the project as Kong’s gal-pal. How did Jessica Lange enjoy shooting her first film? Best not ask Miss Lange. Since 1981, the Oscarwinning actress, supposedly embarrassed by the picture that
launched her career, refuses to discuss King Kong.
Today the World Trade Center buildings are gone—and debate still goes on as to exactly what buildings will replace them
and what memorials will be raised to them. For the moment, at
least, no producer has had the bad taste to exploit the events of
9/11 in a commercial feature or television movie. One of the first
films to reference the events, however, was Spike Lee’s 25th Hour
(2002), which shows the New York City skyline in the opening
credits with the two great beams of light which shot up into the
sky for several months in 2002 to commemorate the lives lost in
the tragedy. But even more moving is a haunting nighttime scene
in 25th Hour, where Barry Pepper and Philip Seymour Hoffman
are alone in Pepper’s Battery Park City apartment, discussing
their relationship with their buddy Edward Norton, who is
about to be put in prison for seven years. As they talk, earthmovers and dump trucks are constantly at work outside the window. With the exception of some small talk at the beginning of
the scene, in which Pepper and Hoffman mention bin Laden and
question the quality of the air (“EPA says it’s fine”), no further
reference is made to 9/11 or to what’s going on outside the window—which makes the scene, essentially done in one long take,
outside the window all the more powerful. In his subtle way, Lee
acknowledges not just the complex, almost unspeakable emotions of the tragedy, but also the fact that life goes on.
Another film to acknowledge the World Trade Center horror is
September 11 (2003), which is a compilation of eleven elevenminute films by directors from around the world: France’s Claude
Lelouch, Iran’s Samira Makhmalbaf, Egypt’s Youssef Chahine,
Bosnia’s Danis Tanovic, West Africa’s Idrissa Quedrago, Britain’s

NEW

302

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Ken Loach, Mexico’s Alejandro Gonzalez Inarritu, Israel’s Amos
Gitai, India’s Mira Nair, America’s Sean Penn, and Japan’s Shohei
Imamura. Some are powerful, others are not. Perhaps it was too
soon.
2. STUYVESANT
345

Chambers

HIGH

SCHOOL

Street

One of the first films to capitalize on the Internet era, Hackers
(1995) saw high-school cyber-soldiers discover a major corporate conspiracy online and then battle the criminals behind it.
The high school used for the film was this appropriately modern Battery Park City institution built in 1991. Formerly in the
East Village, Stuyvesant is one of the country’s top public high
schools, particularly strong in science. On September 11, 2001,
Stuyvesant was in the news when all of its students were evacuated safely shortly after the next-door World Trade Center was
hit by two planes piloted by terrorists.
Visit www.stuy.edu.

3. TWEED
52

COURTHOUSE

Chambers

Street

A monument to the greed of the infamous New York political boss,
William Marcy “Boss” Tweed, this extraordinary Italianate structure was built as a courthouse during the city’s corrupt Tammany
Hall period in the 1870s. Not only did the building take thirteen
years to finish, it cost the then unbelievable sum of $14 million,
most of which was skimmed off by Tweed and his cronies. (The
Tammany Hall era was documented in Martin Scorsese’s 2002 film
Gangs of New York, which was shot not in New York but on a
back lot in Rome.) Despite its questionable origins, the Tweed
Courthouse is a spectacular space, especially the interior, where a
seven-story rotunda is capped with a skylit dome, with cage elevators and two monumental cast-iron staircases adding to the drama.
For filmmakers, the Tweed building was an extremely popular location in the 1970s and 1980s, when it housed various
city offices. In 1974, Joan Micklin Silver used the Tweed’s grand
staircases to represent the Great Hall of Ellis Island in Hester

LOWER

MANHATTAN/STATEN

ISLAND:

OLD

NEW

YORK

303

Street, her comedy/drama about turn-of-the-century Jewish immigrants in New York. In 1980, Brian De Palma shot the same
staircases from a different angel to create the creepy mental institution where the psychiatrist played by Michael Caine worked
in Dressed to Kill. Two years later Sidney Lumet turned the
Tweed into the Boston courthouse where much of the action of
The Verdict takes place. Other features that shot at the Tweed
include Kramer vs. Kramer (1979), Turk 182 (1985), Alphabet
City (1984), and Angel Heart (1987). In the 1990s, however, the
building was closed down for several years for a complete renovation to turn it into offices for the New York City Department
of Education. All this put the Tweed’s movie career on hiatus,
and it has yet to make a major comeback.
But barely a block away on the other side of Chambers Street
at number 31, the stately 1911 Surrogate’s Court Building—with
its columned facade inspired by the Paris Opéra—has been coming on strong as another filmmaker-friendly downtown location.

Tweed Courthouse

NEW

304

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Nicole “Catwoman” Kidman had her office here in Batman Forever (1995) and Keanu Reeves worked here briefly as a district attorney in The Devil’s Advocate (1997). It can also be seen in the
gory finale to Peter Medak’s Romeo Is Bleeding (1994) as well as
in Married to the Mob (1988), Regarding Henry (1991), Conspiracy Theory (1997), The Last Days of Disco (1998), and The Cradle Will Rock (1999).
Visit www.nyc.gov/html/dcas/html/building/man_tweed.html.

4. NEW
60

YORK

Centre

COUNTY

COURTHOUSE

Street

When a shot of this great government building, with its massive
columns and dramatic stone steps, turns up inafilm, it invariably
signals that a courtroom scene is about to follow. It was at the
New York County Courthouse that Macy’s eccentric Santa Claus
supposedly stood trial in 1947 in Miracle on 34th Street. Ten
years later, Henry Fonda was astar juror in the same building in
Twelve Angry Men. For this film, which was made entirely on location in New York, director Sidney Lumet used the courthouse’s
magnificent interior rotunda as well as its striking facade for several sequences.
More recently, Legal Eagles (1986) superstar lawyers Robert Redford and Debra Winger found themselves at 60 Centre
Street, and were followed by Barbra Streisand, who had her day
in court here (and also stopped traffic!) for the film Nuts (1987).
It was also at 60 Centre Street where Charlie Sheen was put
on trial for insider trading at the end of Wall Street (1987), and
where Ray Liotta testified against his former mob buddies Robert De Niro and Paul Sorvino in Goodfellas (1989). In Regarding Henry (1991), Harrison Ford tried a case at 60 Centre Street

prior to an encounter with a stray bullet, whereas new-lawyer-intown Keanu Reeves argued his first case in Manhattan, before
accepting an offer he couldn’t refuse (but should have) from a
diabolical Al Pacino in The Devil’s Advocate (1997). Other films
to use the courthouse include Married to the Mob (1988), City
Hall (1996), and The Hurricane (1999).

Besides appearing in movies, the dramatic courthouse can be
seen in the miniseries Little Gloria, Happy at Last (1985), and

LOWER

MANHATTAN/STATEN

ISLAND:

OLD

NEW

YORK

305

Law & Order:

Chris Noth,
George Dzundza,

Michael Moriarty, and

Richard Brooks at the
New York County

Courthouse

Rage of Angels (1986), and episodes of Kojak, Cagney and
Lacey, Naked City, NYPD Blue, The Equalizer, and, naturally,
Law @& Order.
5. CRIMINAL
100

Centre

COURT

BUILDING

AND

PRISON

Street

This 1939 Art Deco monster is both a courthouse—known firsthand to many a New Yorker who’s done jury duty here—and
the site of the city’s notorious “Tombs” prison, where alleged
criminals often wind up in its holding cells. Among the latter
have been such celebrated names as John Lennon’s killer, Mark
David Chapman, “Preppy Murderer” Robert Chambers, subway
killer Bernard Goetz, rocker Sid Vicious, and rap-star/fashion designer/actor Sean “Puffy” Combs.
Recently the building was the inspiration—and main location—of vintage New York director Sidney Lumet’s AXE series
100 Centre Street. Although not nearly as photogenic as the

NEW

306

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

neighboring New York County Courthouse at 60 Centre Street,
the Criminal Courts Building has nonetheless appeared in its
share of motion pictures, perhaps most notably in Adam’s Rib
(1949), which saw husband-and-wife lawyers Katharine Hepburn and Spencer Tracy spar with each other on opposite sides of
a case involving Judy Holliday, who was accused of attempting to
murder her husband. Another classic appearance was in Kiss of
Death (1947), where D.A. Brian Donlevy presents a plea bargain
offer to Victor Mature from his 100 Centre Street office. The
building was also called on as a location for The Paper (1994),
Conspiracy Theory (1997), and, again, it’s a regular on Law &
Order.
6. WALL

STREET

222

Broadway

OFFICE

A block from Wall Street, this massive office building was
where young Bud Fox (Charlie Sheen) put his trust and his
career in the hands of Gordon Gekko (Michael Douglas), the

Wall Street office
building

LOWER

MANHATTAN/STATEN

ISLAND:

OLD

NEW

YORK

307

unscrupulous prince of 1980s capitalism. The film was Wall
Street (1987)

and it was

the definitive

statement

about

a

greedy decade that many thought would never return. How
wrong they were.
7. THE

“NEW

71

Broadway

YORK

SUN”

OFFICES

Today in New York, there actually is a New York Sun newspaper, which started publishing in 2002 courting a conservative
readership. But back in 1994, the name was up for grabs and director Ron Howard used it in The Paper, his hilarious look at a
day in the life of a metropolitan tabloid newspaper, with Robert
Duvall as editor in chief, Glenn Close as managing editor, and
Michael Keaton as metro editor. The building used for the paper’s headquarters was this Beaux Arts beauty. The offices of the
real New York Sun are nearby at 102 Chambers Street.

NCL a OL

ent

The Paper’s headquarters

308

NEW

8. OFFICE
75

KILLER

Maiden

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

OFFICE

Lane

Photographer-artist Cindy Sherman made her mark as a filmmaker with the 1997 black comedy Office Killer. It told the story
of a shy little copy editor (Carol Kane) who goes on a killing
spree at her office when she learns she’s to be made redundant by
her magazine. The office where she gets her revenge was this
nondescript Downtown low-rise. Much more dramatic are the
bold steel constructions by sculptor Louise Nevelson that stand
in the triangular plaza across the way that bears the late artist’s
name. They are not seen in Sherman’s film, however.
9. VITAGRAPH
140

Nassau

SITE
Street

In 1896, a couple of English immigrants named J. Stuart Blackton
and Albert E. Smith hit upon a novel way to perk up their lackluster vaudeville act . .. motion pictures! Aware that the Edison
Company had just perfected the Vitascope projector, Smith and
Blackton were among the first entrepreneurs to purchase one of
these miraculous new machines. Quickly seeing that the film
business was a lot more lucrative than vaudeville, the pair decided to switch professions. The only problem was that Edison
retained exclusive control over the means of producing films: the
camera. Smith, however, was a clever mechanic, and he soon figured how to turn Edison’s Vitascope projector into a movie camera. And, thus, the American Vitagraph Company was born.
Vitagraph’s first office was in the twelve-story, red-brick
Morse Building, which still stands at the corner of Nassau and

Beekman Streets in Lower Manhattan. Vitagraph’s first film, The
Burglar on the Roof, was shot in the fall of 1897 on the roof of
this same building. A makeshift affair, the sixty-second melodrama featured Smith as cameraman, Blackton as the burglar,
and a supporting cast made up of the building’s janitor’s wife, an
office boy, and a third Vitagraph executive. According to producer/cameraman Smith, the movie cost a whopping $3.50 to
make. It was an inauspicious beginning for a company that
would become one of the major forces on the silent-screen scene.
Vitagraph continued to operate out of 140 Nassau Street and

LOWER

MANHATTAN/STATEN

ISLAND:

OLD

NEW

YORK

309

‘

Braceren
a

THE

ASmirws
REOP

oF

THE

“orn

aim Stuse

Morsz

Bunnie

Vitagraph’s studio on the Morse Building roof, 1897

to shoot films on its roof for another five years. In 1903, the
company’s continued success—especially with its film coverage
of historical events such as Teddy Roosevelt’s inauguration—allowed Smith and Blackton to move to larger quarters over in
Brooklyn. Today, Vitagraph’s Nassau Street birthplace has been
renovated and converted into apartments and offices. Few, if any,
of its tenants have any idea of the building’s filmmaking history.
Indeed, few people except for film historians have ever heard of
Vitagraph, which disappeared from the face of the earth in 1925,
when it was swallowed up by an upstart company headed by a
couple of brothers named Warner.
10.

FEDERAL
28

Wall

HALL

NATIONAL

MEMORIAL

Street

Built as a U.S. customs house in 1842, this imposing Greek temple-like structure at the corner of Wall and Nassau Streets is now
called Federal Hall because it occupies the site of our nation’s
first capitol. In case anyone has forgotten, New York was the

310

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER'S

GUIDE

On the Town at Federal Hall: Gene Kelly, Frank Sinatra, Jules Munshin,
and George Washington, 1949

capital of the United States between 1779 and 1780, and at the
time its city hall building was converted into the country’s first
administrative headquarters and renamed Federal Hall. It was
here that the Continental Congress met, and here that George
Washington was sworn in as the first president of the Republic.
Today, this historic event is commemorated by a statue of Washington that stands in front of Federal Hall.
Over the years, the building’s dramatic fagade—with its thirtytwo-foot-high Doric columns and towering statue of George
Washington—has provided one of New York’s most popular
photo opportunities for speeches, patriotic rallies, and war-bond
drives. Needless to say, the site has also been used by filmmakers
and has furnished a dramatic/historic backdrop for sequences in
Kiss of Death (1947), Force of Evil (1948), On the Town (1949),
Wolfen (1982), Wall, Street (1987), Godzilla (1998), and 25th
Hour (2003). Federal Hall is especially memorable in Kramer vs.
Kramer (1979), where its exterior and interiors were used for

LOWER

MANHATTAN/STATEN

ISLAND:

OLD

NEW

YORK.

311

some of the courthouse sequences in which Meryl Streep battled
Dustin Hoffman for custody of their child, and in Ghost (1990),
as the site of Whoopi Goldberg’s generous donation—prompted
by ghost Patrick Swayze—of $4 million to help the homeless.
Today, besides serving as a location for Manhattan-made
movies, Federal Hall is open to the public and features exhibits
on the history of its site and on early New York.
Visit www.nps.gov/feha/index.htm.

11.

DELMONICO’S
56

Beaver

RESTAURANT

Street

Opened in 1827, this is the oldest restaurant in New York—the
city’s original power-dining spot. Besides its history—Abraham
Lincoln, Oscar Wilde, even Queen Victoria dined here—the restaurant is noted for its architecture, especially its distinctive
colonnaded entrance at the top of the triangle formed by Beaver

Delmonico’s restaurant

NEW

Siz

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

and William Streets. Over the years, the restaurant and its woodpaneled dining room with etched-glass windows have been featured in some top New York films set in the financial district.
Among Delmonico’s on-screen patrons have been Michael Douglas in Wall Street (1987), Jeremy Irons and Ron Silver (as Claus
von Biilow and lawyer Alan Dershowitz) in Reversal of Fortune
(1990), and Richard Gere in Autumn in New York (2000). In The
Associate (1996), however, it’s when Whoopi Goldberg is ex-

cluded from a Delmonico’s power lunch that she realizes her Wall
Street job is in big trouble.
Visit www.dlelmonicosny.com.

12. UNITED
State

STATES

Street

and

CUSTOMS
Bowling

HOUSE
Green

One of Lower Manhattan’s most impressive buildings, this 1907
Beaux Arts stunner began its life as the U.S. Customs House
and is now home to federal government offices as well as the

Former U.S. Customs

House, Bowling Green

LOWER

MANHATTAN/STATEN

ISLAND:

OLD

NEW

YORK

313

National Museum of the American Indian. For filmmakers, this

granite palazzo is rich in photogenic elements: a grand staircase
and massive sculptures and columns mark the facade, whereas
the interior boasts a magnificent muraled rotunda. A versatile
location, the old Custom House has been the headquarters of the
fictional Trask Corporation, where Harrison Ford worked, in
Working Girl (1988); the Manhattan Museum of Art, where the
spirit of evil emerged from a painting, in Ghostbusters II (1989);
the Ritz Gotham Hotel, where Jim Carrey as the Riddler put on
a major bash, in Batman Forever (1995); and the Justice Department offices, where staffer Julia Roberts was frequently visited
by a paranoid Mel Gibson in Conspiracy Theory (1997). The
venerable site has also been used in Autumn in New York
(2000), The Royal Tenenbaums (2001), and How to Lose a Guy
in Ten Days (2003).
Visit www.preserve.org/wtc/us_customs_house.htm.

13. MIB

HEADQUARTERS

Brooklyn-Battery
Battery

Aliens

Tunnel

Ventilator

Shaft,

Place

are illegally immigrating

to the United

States—and

they aren’t from South America, Eastern Europe, or the Middle East. In Men in Black (1997), they’re from Outer Space,

Men ‘in Black
headquarters—actually

|

Brooklyn Battery Tunnel
, airshaft building

YORK:

NEW

314

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

and they’re hardly model citizens—especially since they have superhuman powers, including the ability to morph into practically anything or anyone. Lucky for Earth, we’ve got Tommy
Lee Jones and Will Smith on the job working for a top-secret
special government agency that’s doing its best to fend off this
wave of illegal immigration. The black-suited duo worked at
this odd structure on Battery Place. In reality, it’s the ventilator
shaft for the nearby tunnel that links lower Manhattan with
Brooklyn.
14. STATUE

OF

LIBERTY

Edison filmed this great American lady as early as 1896, just ten
years after she made her official debut in New York Harbor, and
she has been showing up on movie screens ever since. Of her
undoubtedly thousands of film appearances, we nominate the
following as among the all-time best: (1) Saboteur (1942), where
Alfred Hitchcock sets the hair-raising climax of this spy thriller

Inside Miss Liberty: Robert Cummings and Norman
Saboteur, 1942

.

Lloyd in Hitchcock’s

LOWER

MANHATTAN/STATEN

ISLAND:

OLD

.

NEW

YORK

315

Ready for her
close-up: Statue of
'

Liberty, as seen in

“Remo Williams—The
Adventure Begins

on the statue’s crown, arm, and torch. Besides providing one
of the world’s most exotic locales for a fight between an allAmerican hero (Bob Cummings) and a Fifth Column thug
(played by Norman Lloyd of St. Elsewhere), Miss Liberty becomes a symbolic battlefield for the struggle of Western democracy versus Axis fascism that was going on in the real world at
the time; (2) On the Town (1949), the Statue of Liberty According to MGM, with Gene Kelly, Frank Sinatra, and Jules Munshin
looking positively patriotic in their sailor suits as they sing,
dance, and frolic at the base of what we’re sure was Louis B.
Mayer’s favorite leading lady; (3) Funny Giyl (1968), where it

and the rest of New York Harbor feature big in Streisand’s
“Don’t Rain on My Parade” production number; (4) The Godfather, Part II (1974), Coppola’s prequel to the original Godfather, in which we see Vito Corleone as an innocent young boy
catching sight of the statue from the ship bringing him to a new

NEW

316

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

life in America; the contrast of this hopeful image versus his
eventual career as a Mafia don is a powerful one; (5) Superman
(1978), offering the most romantic close encounter with a major monument ever seen on-screen, when Superman gives Lois
Lane a whole new look at Liberty late one night as part of
his private flight-see of New York; (6) Splash (1984)—what bet-

ter place than Liberty Island for a naked mermaid to make a
memorable Big Apple entrance?; (7) Remo Williams—The Adventure

Begins

(1986),

a dreadful

film that’s worth

sitting

through (or fast-forwarding to the last fifteen minutes of
the tape or DVD) for the fight scene atop a Miss Liberty caged
in scaffolding during a major spruce-up for her one-hundredth
birthday bash. Most of the close-ups, however, were done in
Mexico, where the film’s principal photography was based;
(8) Ghostbusters II (1989)—for the chance to see Miss Liberty
come to life; and (9) Independence Day (1996), where she bites

the dust.
After being off-limits to sightseers for security reasons post-9/11,
the Statue of Liberty is open again. Tours leave Battery Park City

daily and include both Liberty Island and Ellis Island. Call 212-2695755 or visit www.circlelineferry.com.

15. STATEN
Battery

ISLAND

FERRY

Place

The twenty-five-minute crossing from Manhattan to Staten Island aboard the venerable Staten Island Ferry is hands down the
biggest bargain in New York. Providing fabulous views of New
York Harbor, Ellis Island, Lower Manhattan, and the Statue of
Liberty, the trip is currently free for pedestrians. Carrying some
seventy thousand passengers a day, the ferry’s real raison d’étre
is to shuttle commuters, most of whom live on Staten Island and
work in the Financial District. On-screen, the ferry’s best-known
regular passenger was Melanie Griffith. In a role that revived her
sagging career, Griffith was the spunky Staten Island secretary
who toughed it out on Wall Street, with very little help from her
monster boss, Sigourney Weaver, in Mike Nichols’s Working Girl
(1988).

LOWER

MANHATTAN/STATEN

ISLAND:

OLD

NEW

YORK

317

A lesser-known film also featuring Staten Island Ferry commuters is Ferry Tales, a documentary short that eavesdrops on
the early-morning conversations of women in the ferry’s powder
room; it was nominated for an Academy Award in 2004. A ferry
bathroom also played a big role in director Jerry Schatzberg’s
classic look at drug addiction, The Panic in Needle Park (1972),
when Al Pacino and girlfriend Kitty Winn are returning to Manhattan aboard the boat with a new puppy. Unable to control
their craving for heroin, they shoot up inside the loo, leaving the
little dog on deck. When they come out, the poor pooch winds
up overboard. Other films that have used the ferry include How
to Lose a Guy in Ten Days (2003)—Matthew McConaughey
takes Kate Hudson home to his parents on Staten Island; The
Devil’s Own (1997)—Brad Pitt’s Irish-American buddy Sean
keeps his boat on Staten Island; The Basketball Diaries (1995)—
the ferry takes Leonardo DiCaprio and his teammates to and
from a game on Staten Island; and the prologue to Woody Allen’s

Manhattan (1979)—the ferry is part of a montage celebrating the
glories of New York.

Working Girl Melanie Griffith commutes to Manhattan on the Staten
Island Ferry, 1988
Se

a

a

TE

318

NEW

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

GUIDE

Offscreen, the last quarter of 2003 was not a good one for
the Staten Island Ferry. On October 16, one boat in its fleet accidentally struck a concrete maintenance pier before docking
at Staten Island, which resulted in the deaths of ten people and
seriously injured another seventy. Also in 2003, it was believed
that author/actor Spalding Gray (who in 2001 played a psychiatrist in Kate and Leopold), whose body washed ashore
several months later, committed suicide by jumping from the
ferry.
16. STATEN
100

ISLAND

Richmond

BOTANICAL
Terrace,

GARDEN

Staten

Island

One of Staten Island’s many surprises, this magical eighty-acre
enclave is a short bus ride from the Staten Island Ferry Terminal
at St. George. Of its over twenty formal gardens, the star attractions include the country’s only classical walled Chinese garden;
a proper English garden modeled on the one at Vita SackvilleWest’s Sissinghurst estate; and a magnificent new Tuscan terrace
with ponds, topiary, and period plantings. Indeed, so much is
happening at the Staten Island Botanical Garden that it is considered the fastest-growing cultural institution in the City of New
York. It’s also starting to catch on with location managers—and
was used extensively in A Beautiful Mind (2001). In the Academy Award-winning film, the little backyard building where
Russell Crowe as John Nash conducted experiments, still stands
on the Botanical Garden grounds. The Botanical Garden was
also used in the Richard Dreyfuss series The Education of Max
Bickford; many times by Law @& Order and Law & Order:
Criminal Intent; and recently by Queer Eye for the Straight Guy,
which used the Chinese garden as a locale for one of the show’s
makeover men to go on a date.
For information, Call 718-273-8200 or visit www.sibg.org.

LOWER

MANHATTAN/STATEN

ISLAND:

OLD

NEW

YORK

319

17. MABEL NORMAND HOUSE
91 Tysen Street, Staten Island

These days, not too many people know who Mabel Normand was,
much less where she was born. One of the greatest comedians of
silent pictures, Mabel Normand was closely linked professionally
and personally with the famous producer/director Mack Sennett.
In her heyday, she appeared opposite superstars like Charlie Chaplin and Fatty Arbuckle, and at one point she even had her own Hollywood studio. Not bad for a Staten Island gal who started out in
the world on November 9, 1892, in this sweet little corner house

across from the historic Snug Harbor section of the borough. Miss
Normand’s eventual Hollywood success was short-lived, however.
In the early 1920s a series of tragedies rocked both her emotional
stability and her film career. Not only had she become addicted to
drugs in the film capital, she was one of the suspects in the scandalous William Desmond Taylor murder in 1922. To make matters
worse, she was implicated in another Hollywood shooting shortly
thereafter, when her chauffeur was accused of killing a man with a
gun that belonged to her. When she died of pneumonia and tuber-

Mabel Normand

NEW

320

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER’S

Mabel Normand

GUIDE

house,

Staten Island

culosis in 1930, she had not made a feature film in seven years. In
1974, her tragic life was the subject of the Broadway musical Mack
and Mabel, which starred Queens-born Bernadette Peters (née Lazzara) as Staten Island’s Mabel Normand.
18.

GODFATHER

ESTATE

110

Longfellow

and

120

Road,

Staten

Island

Benvenuto a Casa Corleone! This cluster of handsome Tudor
homes at the end of a tree-lined cul-de-sac in the fashionable
Todt Hill section of Staten Island was used by director Francis
Ford Coppola in 1971 to represent the Long Island estate of that
nice Italian-American family that we all got to know and love in
The Godfather. Movie lovers will remember especially the spectacular wedding sequence that was shot in the garden of 120
Longfellow.
It is interesting to note that not too far from The Godfather
movie mansion, the real-life Mafia kingpin, Paul Castellano,

LOWER

MANHATTAN/STATEN

ISLAND:

OLD

NEW

YORK

321

The Godfather estate, Staten Island
SE

a

a a

EES osEa ee De

eS CTS

TS Ee

ee

lived in a walled estate on Berodid Road. Castellano’s name was
all over the news in December 1985 when he was rubbed out at

Sparks Steak House on 46th Street in Manhattan.
19. SPLENDOR
4144

IN THE

Victory

GRASS

Boulevard,

HOUSE
Staten

Island

Splendor in the Grass ... great Hollywood movie, right? With
some fine location scenes shot in the Midwest, right? Wrong—
on both counts, for this classic 1960 tale of hot-blooded teenage
love in late-1920s Kansas was shot completely in the New York
metropolitan area. The reason for this surprising bit of location
maneuvering was because the film’s director, Elia Kazan, wanted
to be as close as possible to New York, where_his father was very
ill at the time.
Of the many challenges that Splendor in the Grass created for
its location people, none was more perplexing than finding the
small-town Kansas house in which Natalie Wood’s character,
Deanie Loomis, lived with her family. To the rescue came Staten

322

NEW

Staten Island wedding:
SS

ST

YORK:

THE

MOVIE

LOVER'S

GUIDE

The Godfather, 1972
LL

a

SR

GT

RT SE

ES ESET]

Island, which had on its underdeveloped western edge alittle
settlement of wood-frame homes known as Travis. The corner
house at number 4144 Victory Boulevard was selected for the
Loomis place, and modified slightly through the addition of a
temporary staircase on one side, a bit of gingerbread trim in front,
and a fresh coat of paint all over. The shooting took place between
May 6 and 17, 1960, and, needless to say, it caused quite a stir
in Travis—especially when Natalie Wood’s handsome husband,
Robert Wagner (it was their first time around), showed up one
evening and gave autographs to the crowd of locals who had
gathered at the location. Another “surprise” guest that same
evening was a Twentieth Century-Fox starlet named Joan Collins
who, according to a local newspaper report, was visiting her
good friend Natalie Wood. Maybe so—but in Miss Collins’s tellall autobiography, Past Imperfect (Simon & Schuster, 1984), she
indicates that she had been secretly living with Miss Wood’s costar, Warren Beatty, at the time. Miss Collins goes on to tell of
Mr. Beatty’s lovemaking prowess as well as of the abortion that

LOWER

MANHATTAN/STATEN

ISLAND:

Staten Island sweethearts: Natalie Wood

OLD

NEW

YORK

323

and Warren Beatty in Sp/endor

in the Grass, 1961

she had at his insistence in Newark, New Jersey, during the Splendor shooting.
Today, the little house at 4144 Victory Boulevard is still standing, but the community of Travis, with its new condo developments, could no longer double for pre-Depression Kansas.

co

~

wo

aso

8s
8

= eS

re'

Wepuaysiuy
anuiany

8582R
28

n=O

eS

82

os

Museum
~» Of Natural
History

anuany snquinjoy.

4OSPH40AI0f

=

2. UPd

anuany

= wo

Isayypuy

aplsianly
anid
NL.

Oo o

oe

=

-§S8M\ ,

feinpeoig

a

888

©

N

=
mn
o

oso

N

882825
S88 8

BSS

=

a

Ww oa

apissanly
yled

eo

=

anlig.apisianlyi

| Columbus Circle

9

Time-Warner »1~" Central-Park South: —
‘Genter

© 2004 Jeffrey L. Ward
